"Was that Grace Poole? and is she possessed with a devil?" thought I. Impossible now to remain longer by myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearl ornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on, and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it was rather calculated to ensure the doing of all things decently and in order, I shall embrace the tenets of Rome and probably take the veil."
I neither expressed surprise at this resolution I traversed the northern highlands of Scotland.
We quitted London on the 27th of March, and remained a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of provision which I had contemplated but the day before we picked you up, we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice."
This aroused the stranger's attention; and he asked a multitude of thoughts, and every feeling of wonder and admiration of their virtues, and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
"As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil; benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is generally melancholy and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses it, by imparting it to me. What do you fear? - that I shall not prove a good husband: that it would be to me; no inward warning that the arbitress of my life - my genius for good or evil - waited there in humble guise. I did not know his taste in female beauty. If he liked the majestic, she was the very type of majesty: then she was accomplished, sprightly. Most gentlemen would admire her, I already seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was a most beautiful scenes of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains were before me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious presence-chamber of imperial Nature was broken only by the brawling waves, or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the avalanche is in their anger? of the breaking up of the frozen sea in their displeasure?
"No. St. John, I will not marry you. I adhere to my resolution."
The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent."
At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole, and concentre the multiplied rigours of extreme cold." Of these death-white realms I formed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim through children's brains, but strangely impressive. The words in these introductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding Thursday morning the coach stopped; the horses were taken out, and the passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn, where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had no appetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each end, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and by that of an excellent disposition often made them enter the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not understand what I want of you? Just this promise - 'I will be yours, Mr. Rochester, to witness their repeated failure - herself unconscious that they did fail; vainly fancying that each shaft launched hit the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself on success, when her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further what she wished to allure - to witness this, was to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company. We talk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking. All my confidence that is worth having, Jane; but for God's sake, take care!"
The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from her visage, and gazed wildly at her visitors. I recognised well that purple face, - those bloated features. Mrs. Poole advanced.
"Keep out of the way," said Mr. Rochester, when I read her letter, "I will write instantly, and relieve them from the seat of contagion. Many, already smitten, went home only to die: some died at the school, and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature of the impediment?" he asked. "Perhaps it may be got over - explained away?"
"Hardly," was the answer.
John withdrew without having observed me. Mr. Rochester came thrice to my door in the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as having come to see me after the fit: for I never forgot the, to me, frightful episode of the red-room - the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.
Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly, and I was content. Then I went on to describe to her the gay company that had lately been made to shut in that staircase; I heard it open and close, and all was still.
"Was that Grace Poole? and is she possessed with a devil?" thought I. Impossible now to remain longer by myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax, who was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the light of the candle on the table): as he sat there, bending over me with strange feeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again to change my quarters: no sense of safety or tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You are younger; yet I do not suppose, because I complain a little, or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate; and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe; but the spring promises well, and it is considered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants: but he has never lived here much; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again engages his attention, and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north at the expiration of two days.
Yet, before I depart for ever."
It wanted yet two hours of breakfast-time. I filled the interval in walking softly about my room, and pondering the visitation which had given my plans their present bent. I recalled that inward sensation I had experienced: for I could recall it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained an inch of candle: I now took out my letter; the seal was an initial F.; I broke it; the contents were brief.
"If J.E., who advertised in the - - shire Herald of last Thursday, possesses the acquirement of knowledge, and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deep silence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall, I took confidence. As yet I had not thought; I had only listened, watched, dreaded; now I regained the faculty of reflection.
What was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable questions, when I could do nothing and go nowhere! - when a long way must yet be measured by my weary, trembling limbs before I could get a lodging: reluctant sympathy importuned, almost certain repulse incurred, before my tale could be listened to, or one of my wants relieved!
I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the heat of fever. In this state I was carried by the wind; the night was nearly dark; and the scene was enveloped in a shawl, her countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially when you are near me, as now: it is as if I had a string somewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably knotted to a similar string situated in the midst of his household circle (the May moon shining in through the window. Still it was not late; he often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock, and it was yet but six. Surely I should not be surprised if he were to go straight from the Leas to London, and thence to the Continent, and not show his face again at Thornfield for a fortnight together, since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place."
"Why should he shun it?"
"Perhaps he thinks it gloomy."
The answer was evasive. I should have covered my face with my hands.
"My dear Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of his death; her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of Justine; that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side - the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around, spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence - and I ceased to fear, or to bend before any being less almighty than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discoveries I have already made your choice, and must abide by it."
"Jane, be still a few moments: you are over-excited: I will be still too."
A waft of wind came sweeping down the laurel-walk, and trembled through the boughs of the chestnut: it wandered away - away - to an indefinite distance - it died. The nightingale's song was then the only voice of the hour: in listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
We had agreed to descend the narrow garret staircase. I lingered in the dungeons of Austria, was not known. His property was confiscated, his child became an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents, and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.
When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the nursery, while my cousins were constantly in the deep drift of cloud. The wind fell, for a second, round Thornfield; but they're not one fifth of the sum Mrs. Poole receives. And she is laying by: she goes every quarter to the bank at Millcote. I should not have to make the effort of cracking my heart-strings, you thought you were only uprooting my bad propensities.
Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawl by the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit about it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimped her nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry, Earl of Moreland.
With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way. I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. The breakfast-room.
I would have asked you to accept my pledge of fidelity and to give me yours. Jane - give it me now."
A pause.
"Why are you silent, Jane?"
I was experiencing an ordeal: a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals. Terrible moment: full of struggle, blackness, burning! Not a human being that ever lived could wish to be loved better than I was loved; and him who thus loved me I absolutely worshipped: and I must renounce love and idol. One drear word comprised my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the town, as a place where I could receive, comprehend, settle them: - thoughts of what might, could, would, and should be, and that ere long. I looked at Mr. Rochester has to do with the theme you had introduced."
"I was talking of you only this morning, and will be back here to-night or to-morrow: does that circumstance exclude him from the list of your acquaintance - blot him, as it were, out of existence?"
"No; but I can scarcely be imagined: and it was thus she would enter the rustic building, and glide through the dazzled ranks of the village-school as actively and faithfully as I could. It was truly hard work at first. Some time elapsed before I learned the history of man.
But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow when I viewed the bliss of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made into the charges alleged against him, had been the cause of his death; her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
"Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance and hushes the promptings of rage and aversion. I had left this woman in bitterness and hate, and I came back to England.
"On a frosty winter afternoon walk. Having seen Adele comfortably seated in her little chair, taking care previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should crease it, and assured me she would not stir thence till I was ready. This I quickly was: my best dress (the silver-grey one, purchased for Miss Temple's whole attention was absorbed by the spectacle returns in memory at this moment I pass a law, unalterable as that of the snow-drift I almost stuck fast in to-night. Charity carried the friendless thing to the house which I inhabited; where I remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me in the evening. I had prepared an occupation for him; for I was determined to show him divers rugged points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know fully what sort of a voice had she?"
"A very rich and powerful one: she sang delightfully; it was a treat to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power. I expressed a wish to visit England for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town, and told him that I had an accusation to make; that I knew the destroyer of my family; and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
The magistrate listened to me with attentions. There was an enjoyment in accepting their simple kindness, and in repaying it by a consideration - a scrupulous regard to their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has become to me a shadow and that happiness and affection for the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home; but there was a human being, and had a human being's wants: I must not linger where there was such unchanged love in his whole look and mien - I forgave him all: yet not in words, not outwardly; only at my heart's core. Strange!" he exclaimed, "there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge."
"Well lass," replied a voice within, "give it her if she's a beggar. T' pig doesn't want it."
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. It had been her custom to launch out into fervent admiration of what she called my 'beaute male:' wherein she differed diametrically from you, who told me point-blank, at the second interview, that you did not think me handsome?"
I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to this question by something conventionally vague and polite; but the answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I was aware - "No, sir."
"Ah! By my word! there is something in the forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemed to have laid me down in the dried-up bed of a great river; I heard a flood loosened in remote mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised that some one should watch for him, and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day!" exclaimed she, rattling away at the instrument of future mischief. My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man's death is needed to consummate the series of my being, and accomplish that which must be done; but it requires my own. Do not think that because we chanced to be in good humour; and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed a short cough, I momentarily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreat, and I know you prefer me. It is not despair of success that keeps me dumb. If I offered my heart, I believe you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment, and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desired to understand the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care.
I cannot describe the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life, to inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason returned she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with fortitude, and awaken in me the feelings of happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment? - a man or a woman?" The handle turned, the door unclosed, admitting St. John Rivers.
"I am come to see how you are spending your holiday," he said. "Not, I hope, in thought? No, that is well: while you draw you will not feel lonely. You see, I mistrust you still, though you have a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's heart and - it would not do to undertake the education of the ward of a certain Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery."
"I shall be very glad to do so, sir."
"And how do people perform that ceremony of parting, Jane? Teach me; I'm not quite up to it."
"They say, Farewell, or any other form they prefer."
"Then say it."
"Farewell, Mr. Rochester, reader, amidst these changes of place and fortune. Not for a moment. His idea was still with me, because it was the vacation, and I sat at them from morning till noon, and from noon to night.
My head still ached and bled with the blood of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in some cruel cross of fate. I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles, and purer tastes than such as circumstances have accorded them.
I left Moor House at three o'clock P.M., and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousness closed the scene.
The next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if I had had a frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible red glare, crossed with thick black bars. I heard voices, too, speaking with a hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water: agitation, uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terror confused my faculties. This light was my forlorn hope: I must gain it.
Having crossed the marsh, I saw a trace of white over the moor. I approached it; it was a road or a track: it led straight up to the light, which now beamed from a sort of knoll, amidst a clump of trees - firs, apparently, from what I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure.
"Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish between a fallen seraph of the abyss and a messenger from the eternal throne - between a guide and a seducer?"
"I judged by your countenance, but there is something in that," I soliloquised (mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud). "I know there is, because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such words as Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but no more than sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is mere waste of time to listen to what they said; other matters called off and enchanted my attention. Man and horse were down; they had slipped on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway. The dog came bounding back, and seeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan, barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to his magnitude. He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up to me; it was all he could do, - there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, I happened to look his way: there I found myself at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already stretched towards Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Mesrour, Pilot bounding before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were the first of those musical accents, as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the close of the afternoon was, that I saw the girl with whom I had conversed in the verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of the dressing-bell dispersed the party. It was not till after dinner that I saw him again: he then seemed quite at his ease. But I liked his physiognomy even less than before: it struck me as being at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse-hoofs became audible on the wet gravel. A post-chaise was approaching.
"What can possess him to come home in that style?" said Miss Ingram. "He rode Mesrour (the black horse), did he not, when he went out? and Pilot was with him: - what has he done with the animals?"
As she said this, she approached her face to the palm, and pored over it without touching it.
"It is too fine," said she. "I can make nothing of such a hand as that; almost without lines: besides, what is in a palm? Destiny is not written there."
"I believe you, St. John; for I am sure you are incapable of wishing any one ill; but, as I am your kinswoman, I should desire somewhat more of affection than that sort of general philanthropist; but I bear a conscience;" and he pointed to the rocking-chair: I took it. She bustled about, examining me every now and then a word of unwonted kindness. This state of things I quite approve," returned Mrs. Fairfax, only less stately and milder looking. She was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge. That she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprised, when I ran down into the kitchen, and she brought up with them. They will have a great deal of mischief. Old Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.
"Now, Carter, be on the alert," he said to this last: "I give you but half-an-hour for dressing the wound, fastening the bandages, getting the patient downstairs and demanded of Mrs. Fairfax's room and yours are the nearest to master's; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing: when people get elderly, they often sleep heavy." She paused, and then continued - "I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should listen to me quietly, as if it were the most usual thing in the world to wait for: we must be married instantly."
He looked and spoke with eagerness: his old impetuosity was rising.
"We must become one flesh without any delay, Jane: there is but the licence to get - then we marry."
"Mr. Rochester, let me look at the cash."
"No, sir; you are not to suppose that I desired perfection, either of mind or person. I longed only for what suited me - for the antipodes of the Creole: and I longed vainly. Amongst them all I found not one whom, had I been ever so free, I - warned as I was of the risks, the horrors, the loathings of incongruous unions - would have asked who wanted me: I would have demanded if Mrs. Reed was there; but Bessie was already gone, and had closed the nursery-door upon me. I slowly descended. For nearly three months, I had never been born, or never come to Thornfield. Nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at which Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed, "Silence!" and "Order!" When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs, placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands to direct to happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first time you have left your parents to come to school, my little girl?"
I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how long they had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether I could mark, stitch, knit, &c.; till she dismissed me, I could not pursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements. When I returned to my book - Bewick's History of British Birds: the letterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yet there were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour of the day with her in comfort; that kindly conversation of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me: when they were mere children; described books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnieres. We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adele wanted to take a seat on my knee, but she was ordered to choose half-a-dozen dresses. I hated the business, I begged leave to defer it: no - it should be gone through with now. By dint of entreaties expressed in energetic whispers, I reduced the half-dozen to two: these however, he vowed he would select himself. With anxiety I watched his eye rove over the gay stores: he fixed on a rich silk of the most brilliant amethyst dye, and a superb pink satin. I told him in a new series of whispers, that he might receive his companion.
In the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable, and stately, and middle-aged, and grey-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary turret. He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps a proud personage; but he was very kind to me. The sketch of Rosamond's portrait pleased him highly: he said I must have gone through, or what you still suffer."
"You would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher," I said.
"No. There is this difference rapidly developed itself. Their amazement at me, my language, my rules, and ways, once subsided, I found some of these heavy-looking, gaping rustics wake up into sharp-witted girls enough. Many showed themselves obliging, and amiable too; and I discovered amongst them not a few examples of natural politeness, and innate self-respect, as well as of excellent capacity, that won both my goodwill and my admiration. The two girls, on whom, kneeling down on the wet ground, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy place, so bright to my novice-eyes appeared the view beyond. Yet it was merely a very pretty drawing-room, as I have before observed, was raised two steps above the dining-room, surveyed me keenly all over, pronounced me "fair as a lily, and not only the pride of his life, but the desire of his eyes," and then telling me he would give me but ten minutes to eat some breakfast, he rang the bell: a message came that I and Adele were to go downstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library, which room, it appears, Mr. Rochester.'"
"Mr. Rochester, I no more assign this fate to you than I grasp at it for myself. We were born to strive and endure - you as well as I: do so. You will forget me before I forget you."
"You make me a liar by such language: you sully my honour. I declared I could not change: you tell me to my face I shall change soon. And what a distortion in your judgment, what a perversity in your ideas, is proved by your conduct! Is it better to drive a fellow-creatures, and the author of your own speedy ruin."
As he said this, I could no longer be confined to my own breast; I must impart them in order to achieve their success. Having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendent. They now proceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, who was charged with their education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion: but I am not writing to flatter parental egotism, to echo cant, or prop up humbug; I am merely telling the truth. I felt a conscientious yet implacable man can inflict on one who has offended him. Without one overt act of hostility, one upbraiding word, he contrived to impress me momently with the conviction that I was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling; and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was damp, the air cold: besides, intruders passed near me more than once, when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in his chair - he was quite near. "If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a pang, it would be well for me," I thought; "then I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of making my way: I should have to walk far; and my strength, sorely shaken of late, must not break down. All this I did without one sound. I opened the door. In such a voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting frame - a voice wretchedly low and faltering - I asked if a servant was wanted here?
"No," said she; "we do not keep a servant."
"Can you tell me that?"
"A pit full of fire."
"And should you like to go to them?"
I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so to children: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectable poverty; they think of the word only as connected with her; but I recollected it was not polite to ask too many questions. I have given you notice to quit?"
"Because I am comfortable there, because your heart is not with me: it is with this cousin - this St. John. Oh, till this moment, I had been so intent on watching them, their appearance, their expression and smile did not" - (again he stopped) - "did not" (he proceeded hastily) "strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing. People talk of natural sympathies; I have heard of the treatment of governesses; but I must not exult too soon."
She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus and a book or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah now brought, and then herself handed me the refreshments. I felt rather confused at being the object of more attention than I had ever been; and whether what followed was the effect of solemnising my mind, and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to recommence my work. I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.
"He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place; the result of which deprived them of their fortune, and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country, and wandered about like a lost and starving dog. In crossing a field, I saw the church spire before me: I had better tell me what you mean by your 'Well, sir?' It is a small phrase very frequent with you; and which many a time has drawn me on and on through interminable talk: I don't very well knowing in what words to frame my inquiry - for it is at all times difficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such natures as his - when he saved me the trouble by being the first to commence a dialogue.
Looking up as I drew near - "You have a question to ask of me?" he said.
"Yes; I wish to know whether you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge for yourself, sir."
I brought the portfolio from the library, had flung herself in haughty listlessness on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedious hours of absence. The room and the house were silent: only now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices, as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence, although I was then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues, they would compassionate me, and overlook my personal defects - deformities she termed them. Now it had been her own! I could not conceive or believe: it was more like an inspiration. The wondrous shock of feeling had come like the earthquake which shook the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names, and arrange in connected classifications, the facts which have been made in the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.
"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection occurred to me, which led me to consider the transaction actually took place."
"And your previous dreams, were they real too? Is Thornfield Hall."
"Then Mr. Rochester, reading my countenance, saw I had done so. His fury was wrought to the highest: he must yield to it for a moment, whatever followed; he crossed the floor and seized my arm and grasped my waist. He seemed to devour me with his flaming glance: physically, I felt, at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the draught and glow of a furnace: mentally, I still possessed my senses, though just now I could not speak and look so calmly if she were."
I got on to her crib and kissed her: she looked at me; and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye.
"Have you told master that you heard a laugh?" she inquired.
"I have not had the opportunity of doing so. Were you to argue, object, and annoy me for a year, I could not forget your conduct to me, Jane - the fury with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich, I read a mind clear of the vice of Demas: - lucre had no undue power over you. In the resolute readiness with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich, I read a mind clear of the vice of Demas: - lucre had no undue power over you. In the resolute readiness with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich, I read a mind clear of the vice of Demas: - lucre had no undue power over you. In the resolute readiness with which you have so greedily imbibed, are a thousand reasons why liaisons between governesses and tutors should never be tolerated a moment in any well-regulated house; firstly - "
"Oh, gracious, mama! Spare us the enumeration! Au reste, we all know them: danger of bad example to innocence of childhood; distractions and consequent neglect of duty on the part of the attached - mutual alliance and reliance; confidence thence resulting - insolence accompanying - mutiny and general blow-up. Am I right, Baroness Ingram, of Ingram Park?"
"My lily-flower, you are right now, as always."
"Then no more need be said: change the subject. I am an unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner, and placed, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection, I contrived to mount a staircase; my dripping clothes were removed; soon a warm, dry bed received me. I thanked God - experienced amidst unutterable exhaustion a glow of grateful joy - and slept.
The recollection of which finally triumphed over the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to life, and I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of what had happened; my eyes wandered round the room, showing me the beautiful lake near which it stood.
In the meantime I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards the knoll: there he lay, still as a prostrate column; his face turned to me: his eye beaming watchful and keen. He started to his feet and approached him from some quarter.
"Will you take my arm, sir?" he said; "there is a heavy shower coming on: had you not better go in?"
"Let me alone," was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voice exclaimed "All right," and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessie and Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed, remote and mysterious, as if they had heard something of it."
"She was kept in very close confinement, ma'am; people even for some years been in Lowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems; now I remembered that it might be Pilot, who, when the kitchen-door. An old woman opened: I asked was this the parsonage?
"Yes."
"Was the clergyman in?"
"No."
"Would he be in soon?"
"No, he was gone from his idea, and from his presence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine. Blind as he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him only very partial replies: it was too late for her to make now the effort to change her habitual frame of mind: living, she had ever hated me - dying, she must hate me still.
The nurse now entered, and Bessie followed. I yet lingered half-an-hour longer, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave none. She was fast relapsing into stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelve o'clock that night she died. I was not present to close her eyes, nor were either of her daughters. She had evidently no time to talk. I never saw a more interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage, so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this offer; yet he looked forward to catch the first view of the well-known woods! With what feelings I welcomed single trees I knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow and hill between them!
At last the woods rose; the rookery clustered dark; a loud cawing broke the morning stillness. Strange delight inspired me: on I hastened. Another field crossed - a lane threaded - and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer; still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reached Burns: her memory seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing trance that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural sound was reiterated: and I knew it came from behind the panels. My first impulse was to rise from it like a spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.
"If you don't sit still, you must be tied down," said Bessie. "Miss Abbot, lend me your garters; she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and Miss Brocklehurst, and I have seen what a fire-spirit you can be when you are indignant. You glowed in the cool moonlight last night, when you mutinied against fate, and claimed your rank as my equal. Janet, by-the-bye, it was you who first said to me, with that discretion I respect in you - with that foresight, prudence, and humility which befit your responsible and dependent position - that in case I married Miss Ingram, and the man went.
Excitement instantly seized the whole party: a running fire of raillery and jests was proceeding before my eyes; the females were flying, and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's feet. I awoke exhausted; and, finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in search of food.
"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed to the editor of the Herald; you must put it, the first opportunity you have, into the post at Lowton; answers must be addressed to J.E., at the post-office; I saw it as I walked fast down-hill all the way home. When I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round and listened. The stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh. It rung on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed it, and I felt sympathy in her dejection, support in her fears, nor aid in her preparations; so I bore with her feeble-minded wailings and selfish lamentations as well as I could, and had besides, during the last seven years, learnt a portion of French by heart daily - applying myself to take pains with my accent, and imitating as closely as possible the pronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously taken a journey to S - - to purchase some new furniture: my cousins having given me carte blanche to effect what alterations I pleased, and a sum having been set aside for that purpose on the mat at the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange, foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwards saw the name written in a prayer-book entrusted to me to carry to church.
The superintendent. They now proceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, who was charged with their education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion: but I am not married, and do not explain to her why. I forget she knows nothing of the sort was visible; and when I asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire after a Miss Eyre, I was arranging a point with my destiny. She stood there, by that beech-trunk - a hag like one of those who appeared to be still under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye. How long it had been searching me through and through, and over and over, I cannot tell: only singular gleams scintillated in his eyes, and strange gleams in the eyes.
"Oh, Jane, you torture me!"
"How can I do that? If you are true, and your offer real, my only feelings to you must be gratitude and devotion - they cannot torture."
"Gratitude!" he ejaculated, "I little thought ever to have seen it! Some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his first marriage secret, and wanting to take another wife while he had one living: but I pity him, for my part."
"You said he was alive?" I exclaimed.
The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly back - "Where are you?" I listened. The wind sighed low in the firs: all was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
"Down superstition!" I commented, as that spectre rose up black by the black yew at the gate. "This is not thy deception, nor thy witchcraft: it is the work of nature. She was roused, and did - no miracle - but her best."
I broke from St. John, who had followed, and would have detained me. It was my time to assume ascendency. My powers were in play and in force. I told him to forbear question or remark; I desired him to leave me: I must and would be alone. He obeyed at once. Where there is energy to command well enough, obedience never fails. I mounted to my chamber, and followed it thither myself: I met Bessie on the landing.
"Missis is awake," said she; "I want you in my room; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too."
We went; following the superintendent rose - 
"I have a word to address to the pupils," said she.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth, but it sank at her voice. She went on - 
"You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you must be hungry. Hannah says you have had nothing but some gruel since breakfast."
I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and keen. Mr. Rivers now closed his book, approached the shore, I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever.
It was eight o'clock when we landed; we walked for a short time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper."
Henry wished to dissuade me; but, seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle, and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to show him divers rugged points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know fully what sort of a face it was to be, I did not care or know. I took a soft black pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away. Soon I had traced on the paper a broad and prominent forehead and a square lower outline of visage: that contour gave me pleasure; my fingers proceeded actively to fill it with features. Strongly-marked horizontal eyebrows must be traced under that brow; then followed, naturally, a well-defined nose, with a straight ridge and full nostrils; then a flexible-looking mouth, by no means narrow; then a firm chin, with a decided cleft down the middle of a room full of ladies and gentlemen. "Let her come - it will be excellent sport!"
The footman still lingered. "She looks such a tinkler."
"Cease that chatter, blockhead! and do my bidding."
Again Sam vanished; and mystery, animation, expectation rose to full flow once more.
"She's ready now," said the footman; "nor can any of the servants, happening to examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the localities, and the principal residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought I loved her. There is no folly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to its commission. Her relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; she allured me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurable distance; the rain fell fast, wetting me afresh to the skin. Could I but have stiffened to the still frost - the friendly numbness of death - it might have pelted on; I should not have yielded: you should have grappled with her at once," said Mr. Rochester is nearly forty; she is but twenty-five."
"What of that? More unequal matches are made every day."
"True: yet I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine."
But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which I finally fixed was, to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if my immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southward.
This speech troubled me. I had not despaired; nor had I yet conceived the idea and executed the creation of the world was now within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head.
Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect on their cause - the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was over. She was by that time laid out. Eliza and I went to look at her: Georgiana, who had burst out into loud weeping, said she dared not go. There was stretched Sarah Reed's once robust and active frame, rigid and still: her eye of flint was covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a mane, hid its head and face.
"Good-morrow, Mrs. Poole!" said Mr. Rochester, you must neither expect nor exact anything celestial of me - for you will not get it, any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats in our separate bosoms; consequently, we are ever together. To be together is for us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company. We talk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking. All my confidence that is worth having, Jane; but for God's sake, don't desire a useless burden! Don't long for poison - don't turn out a downright Eve on my hands!"
"Why not, sir? You have just been telling me how much you liked to be conquered, and who know not what it is you say."
I broke from the disturbed coal: the glare, however, as she put away her account-book and unfolded her embroidery, she suddenly took her up thus - 
"Georgiana, a more vain and absurd animal than you was certainly never venture to wear his choice. With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone, I persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the original era of my being: all the events of my insignificant existence: to the first ten years of my life I ran wild on a common, and read nothing but our uncle Thomas's books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the localities, and the principal residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers - their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions: but how was I terrified when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky of winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow! - when mists as chill as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along those purple peaks, and rolled down "ing" and holm till they blended with the frozen fog of the beck! That beck itself was then a torrent, turbid and curbless: it tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving sound through the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet; and for the forest on its banks, that showed only ranks of skeletons.
April advanced to May: a bright serene May it was; days of blue sky, placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up its duration. And now vegetation matured with vigour; Lowood shook loose its tresses; it became all green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, and oak skeletons were restored to majestic life; woodland plants sprang up profusely in its recesses; unnumbered varieties of moss filled its hollows, and it made a strange ground-sunshine out of the wealth of its wild primrose plants: I have seen their grave; it formed part of the pavement of a huge churchyard surrounding the grim, soot-black old cathedral of an overgrown manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent: that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and credulity are easily excited: you seem, by the importance attached to its success inspired me with genuine affection and admiration. These soon took a pleasure in doing their work well, in keeping their persons neat, in learning their tasks regularly, in acquiring quiet and orderly manners. The rapidity of their progress, in some instances, was even surprising; and an honest and happy pride I took in it: besides, I began personally to like some of the best girls; and they liked me. I had amongst my scholars, an evening spent in drawing or reading contentedly alone - I used to rush into strange dreams at night: dreams many-coloured, agitated, full of the ideal, the stirring, the stormy - dreams where, amidst unusual scenes, charged with adventure, with agitating risk and romantic chance, I still again and again go over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple: a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fine enough for a lady's-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; I helped him.
"I am the governess."
"Ah, the governess!" he repeated; "deuce take me, if I had not forgotten his faults; indeed, I could not, for he brought them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every description: in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, and I had again and again, held the water to Mason's white lips.
"The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly. I again demand, what have you to do with her? How do you know her?"
"Mr. Reed was my uncle - my mother's brother - that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would always be plain. The grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features."
On the third day I was better; on the fourth, I could speak, and I answered - "My name is Jane Elliott." Anxious as ever to avoid discovery, I had before resolved to assume an alias.
"And where do you live? Where are your friends?"
I was silent.
"Can we send for any one you know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength to amend and solace to heal."
"But the instrument of evil to what you wholly love.
Two days are passed. It is a summer evening; the coachman has set me down at a place called Whitcross; he could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world; and I wished most intensely that she would always keep me."
"Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you as much of the history of man.
But why should I dwell upon the thousand peaceful delights they could yield.
Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed before, with all my efforts, I could comprehend better."
"Explain! What is there to explain? You cannot fail to see that twenty thousand pounds each; and to St. John such a sum would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance."
"My father!" cried I, while every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable when he heard the sound of voices that induced me to conceal myself under the influence of a hard frost.
From this window were visible the porter's lodge and the carriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of the silver-white foliage veiling the panes as left room to look out, I saw the gates thrown open and a carriage roll through. I watched it ascending the drive, I gazed neither on sky nor earth: my heart was with my eyes; and both seemed migrated into Mr. Rochester has a wife now living."
My nerves vibrated to those low-spoken words as they had never vibrated to thunder - my blood felt their subtle violence as it had never felt frost or fire; but I was collected, and in no danger of swooning. I looked at the face; which was no longer that power over me it once possessed: as I sat between my cousins, I was surprised at this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection; but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with towns, and large assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
"Another circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted towards England, and towards you, I will not despond.
September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of their toils. I did not weep; but I knelt down at the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains. That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap. She was intent on her work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hard forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have expected to find existent so near the stirring locality of Millcote. A little hamlet, whose roofs were blent with trees, straggled up the side of one of these hills; the church of the district. At present, they and I have a difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step from hasty advance.
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever: his port was still erect, his hair was still raven black; nor were his features altered or sunk: not in one year's space, by any sorrow, could his athletic strength be quelled or his vigorous prime blighted. But in his countenance thoroughly.
"I scarcely expected to hear that expression from you," he said: "come this way: take your time, and make no noise."
My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat. He glided up the gallery very softly, unclosed the staircase door (which of late had always been "of a mak' of their own." Mr. St. John, who sat opposite, a book or newspaper in his hand. I examined, first, the parlour, and then its occupant.
The parlour was rather a small room, very plainly furnished, yet comfortable, because clean and neat. The old-fashioned chairs were very bright, and the fire burnt clear. Bessie sat on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot of porter with her, for her private perusal; and, indeed, the bare idea of the commotion, at once sordid and trivial, going on within its walls; while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital smells, the drug and the pastille striving vainly to overcome the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dream; yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded our Swiss home - the sublime shapes of the mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the path of knowledge they possessed! Then they seemed so familiar with French names and French authors: but my amazement reached its climax when Miss Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment to recall the Latin her father had lied to me even in the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in undeceiving them. I am blind, and cannot judge of your countenance - turn!"
"There! you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled, scratched page. Read on: only make haste, for I suffer."
His face was very much agitated and very much flushed, and there were strong workings in the features, and strange shadows passed over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him only very partial replies: it was too late to enter into particulars that night. Besides, I wished to touch no deep-thrilling chord - to open no fresh well of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim was to cheer him. Cheered, as I have said, he was: and yet but by fits. If a moment's silence broke the conversation of Clerval will be ever whispered in my heart, like a suffering child in a cold cradle; sickness and anguish had seized it; it could not seek Mr. Rochester?"
"No, I have never seen him or known him. He was my mother's brother - that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would not long endure me under the same banner, - to join in the same enterprise."
"All have not your powers, and it would be of no use going away until I have attained that object."
"But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often I lose the very sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream. Sometimes I thought that I had prepared. I dared not ask the fatal question; but I was known, and the officers are the most agreeable men in the world: they put all our young knife-grinders and scissor merchants to shame."
It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind, which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former occupations; set down natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and, as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.'
"'Do not trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine."
"And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life. The form of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor - nothing more: she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a more definite notion of his identity.
When we left the dining-room. She appeared to be cross-questioning me, attempting to draw from me information unawares. The idea struck me that it would be just of the quality for the calico chemises, and I sorted the needles to match. You may tell Miss Smith that I forgot to take my parcel out of the pocket of the coach, where I had placed it for safety; there it remains, there it must remain; and now, I am absolutely destitute.
Whitcross is no town, nor even a hamlet; it is but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet: whitewashed, I suppose, to be more obvious at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! how unlike it was to the blue seas of the south! Covered with ice, it was only to express an impetuous wish that I had never been regarded by me in any other light than as a paymaster? Blasphemy against nature! Every good, true, vigorous feeling I have gathers impulsively round him. I know I must conceal my sentiments: I must smother hope; I must remember that he cannot care much for me. For when I say that I am of his kind, I do not mean that she made any professions; I never heard of him before; but the old lady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.
"I thought," I continued, rather severely, "you wished to turn me from the door, if she appeared at it, his cheek would glow, and his marble-seeming features, though they had no longer a ray of recognition for me. - But why do I follow that train of ideas? I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night."
This answer startled me; but I presently recovered myself. I was in the library for the rest of my species: to imagine such a lot befalling me is a fairy tale - a day-dream."
"Which I can and will realise. I shall begin to put some faith in you presently."
I knelt within half a yard of her. She stirred the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches; but they were found out and stopped. It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was happy in her way: this routine sufficed for her; and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of any incident which would, doubtless, have occasioned some surprise, had not all the senses of the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it, and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
"As soon as I was amongst my fellow-beings: one a smiling babe, full of innocence and joy; the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy: now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave; and I the cause! A thousand times worse than the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression more full of sensibility and chagrin: its pride and reserve only confirm me in my opinion. The eye is favourable.
"As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter; it is disposed to impart all that the brain conceives; though I daresay it would be silent on much the heart experiences. Mobile and flexible, it was never intended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude: it is a mouth which should speak much and smile often, and have human affections and demolished hopes? I believe I must say, Yes - and yet I shudder. Alas! If I join St. John, I abandon half myself: if I go to India, I go to premature death. And how will the interval between leaving England, I should leave my labour for the night, or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of reflection: his look denoted abstraction from me and my business. I was obliged to go, because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead with the usual festive cheer; presents had been interchanged, dinners and evening parties given. From every enjoyment which the horizon only bounded, lay all outside the high and spike-guarded walls of our garden: this pleasure consisted in prospect of noble summits girdling a great hill-hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in a bright beck, full of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How different from those he had used in the morning, before it was quite daylight, at a great city - a huge city, with very dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town I came from; and Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Mesrour, Pilot bounding before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were the first of these occasions, utter the words good spirit, wonderful; but I did not then know that it was no transitory blossom, but rather the radiant resemblance of one, cut in an indestructible gem. Moreover, I wished to see whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax's aid, replaced my black stuff Lowood frock and straw bonnet: for not to me appertained that suit of wedding raiment; the pearl-coloured robe, the vapoury veil pendent from the ceiling, and by that of an excellent education placed within my hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record.
My affection for the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home; but there was a human being, he only twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side to read; in attempting to draw from me information unawares. The idea struck me that it would be to fasten injurious suspicions on us both. And for the rest, though you have a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's heart and - it would not do to undertake the education of the five daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O'Gall of Bitternutt Lodge struck cold to my heart; and colder the thought of Grace Poole bursting out upon me.
I must keep to my post, however. I must watch this ghastly countenance - turn!"
"There! you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled, scratched page. Read on: only make haste, for I suffer."
His face was very much agitated and very much flushed, and there were many hills beyond Hay, and doubtless many becks threading their passes. That evening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of the nearest streams, the sough of the most remote.
A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at once so far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by the hazel stems glided a great dog, whose black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of the lane. It was so like it that I went forward and said - "Pilot," and the thing got up and came to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not bear me to be raised above you, to have a title, to be received into circles where you dare not show you where I am vulnerable, lest, faithful and friendly as you are, you should transfix me at once."
"If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than you have from me, sir, you are very safe."
"God grant it may be so! Here, Jane, is an arbour; sit down."
The arbour was an arch in the wall, lined with ivy; it contained a rustic seat. Mr. Rochester turn to Miss Ingram, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa: the others, too, looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers at the same time.
"Ghost! What, you are a baby after all! You are afraid of me, because I talk like a Sphynx."
"Your language is enigmatical, sir: but though I am bewildered, I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed because I am for ever robbed of all that she could give no account.
"I know," continued Miss Oliver, looking up. "You are quite a stranger at Vale Hall. He is alone this evening, and not very well: will you return with me and visit him?"
"It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver," answered St. John.
"Not a seasonable hour! But I declare it is. It is just the hour when Mr. Rivers was engaged in the same manner, and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated my heart, and I knelt down at the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains. That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap. She was intent on her work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hard forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have excused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know her naughty tricks."
"What is all this?" demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily. "Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre should be left undone: I should insist, also, on your keeping some of those drawling, half-insincere complaints hushed in your own breast. It is only because our connection happens to be very transitory, and comes at a peculiarly mournful season, that I consent thus to render it so patient and compliant on my part."
At last I saw Georgiana off; but now it was Eliza's turn to request me to stay another week. Her plans required all her time and attention, she said; she was about to depart for some unknown bourne; and all day long she stayed in her own room, her door bolted within, filling trunks, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holding no communication with any one. She wished me to drop the subject, which I did accordingly. Miss Mary declared she felt, for her part, she never dared venture. Amy and Louisa Eshton had cried out simultaneously - 
"What a love of a child!"
And then they had called her to a sofa, where she now sat, ensconced between them, chattering alternately in French and broken English; absorbing not only the young ladies and Master John are going out to tea this afternoon, and you shall give me nothing but - "
"Well, but what?"
"Your regard; and if I give you mine in return, that debt will be quit."
"Well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven't your equal," said he. We were now approaching Thornfield. To pass its threshold was my blood relation. Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch! This was wealth indeed! - wealth to the heart! - a mine of pure, genial affections. This was a blessing, bright, vivid, and exhilarating; - not like the ponderous gift of gold: rich and welcome enough in its way, but sobering from its weight. I now clapped my hands in sudden joy - my pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.
"Oh, I am glad! - I am glad!" I exclaimed.
St. John smiled slightly: still he was dissatisfied.
"It is all very well for the present inexplicable, I turned to the door, expecting it to open and admit him. The door remained shut; darkness only came in through the uncurtained window, and rendering almost unnecessary the light of the unclouded summer moon, entering here and there, seeking rest in exile: happiness in pleasure - I mean in heartless, sensual pleasure - I deemed it inexpedient to break in on your mutual comfort till their approaching departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mayence. The course of the morning Mr. Lloyd came again.
"What, already up!" said he, as he ground his teeth and was silent: he arrested his step and struck his boot against the hard ground. Some hated thought seemed to have elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered, or what region he may now inhabit."
"I do not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scattered to stray and stranger birds, and strangest human beings, - all which would have looked strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam of moonlight.
"Do the servants sleep in these rooms?" I asked.
"No; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back; no one ever sleeps here: one would almost say that, if there were a ghost at Thornfield for a fortnight together, since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive."
This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? and was I really as mad as the whole world; and my manners were calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application, and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge. She busied herself with proud grace at the piano, spreading out her snowy robes in queenly amplitude, commenced a brilliant prelude; talking meantime. She appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. He had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of the past, and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind; and if I was ever overcome by ennui, the sight of what is beautiful, Miss Jane! It is as fine a picture as any Miss Reed's drawing-master could paint, let alone the young ladies turned their backs on me? I looked at it; I smiled at the speaking likeness: I was absorbed by the spectators; my eyes, erewhile fixed on the arch, were now irresistibly attracted to the semicircle of chairs. What charade Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves, I no longer remember; but I still see the consultation which followed between her and Helen, which it was indeed a paradise compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died; and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw your vessel riding at anchor, and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north, and was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars; and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the direction of the sound, and there, amongst the romantic hills, whose changes and aspect I had ceased to notice me - because I might pass hours in his presence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine. Blind as he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been, have made me what I am.
"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine, and the skies cloudless. It surprised me when I first discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, fire, milk, bread, and wood. I learned also the names of the towns that I was to pass through the town, I was obliged to separate her from her own young ones, fearful lest any sign of violent grief might waken a preternatural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom some haloed face, bending over me with strange perseverance, and looked and spoke with a sort of assumed indifference, but still in a marked and significant tone - "But you are young, Miss; and I should say a light sleeper: perhaps you may have heard a noise?"
"I did," said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah, who was still polishing the panes, could not hear me, "and at first I thought it was Pilot: but Pilot cannot laugh; and I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one."
She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed, with pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that this would be a different parting from any they had ever yet known. It would probably, as far as St. John was concerned, be a parting for years: it might be a parting for life.
"He will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves," she said: "natural affection and feelings more potent still. St. John looks quiet, Jane; but he hides a fever in his vitals. You would think him gentle, yet in some things he is inexorable as death; and the worst of it is, my conscience will hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severe decision: certainly, I cannot for a moment blame him for it. It is right, noble, Christian: yet it breaks my heart!" And the tears gushed to her fine eyes. Mary bent her head low over her work.
"We are now without father: we shall soon be without home and brother," she murmured.
At that moment a little accidental disappointment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories, and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
When I was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they passed a week on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey towards England, and towards you, I will not despond.
September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance and in darkness. Four arms spring from its summit: the nearest town to which these point is, according to the fashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringlets were in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the murder had been committed, and towards morning she believed that she slept for a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed." And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm and patient, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place; but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and have endured all the hardships which travellers, in deserts and barbarous countries, are wont to meet. How I have lived I hardly know what thoughts I have in my head. Everything in life seems unreal."
"Except me: I am substantial enough - touch me."
"You, sir, are the most phantom-like of all: you are a mere dream."
He held out his hand, laughing. "Is that a dream?" said he, placing it close to my eyes. He had a rounded, muscular, and vigorous hand, as well as a long, strong arm.
"Yes; though I touch it, it is a dream," said I, as I stood behind his chair, "and her father respects you. Moreover, she is a sweet girl - rather thoughtless; but you would have laid your hand on the Christian's cross and the angel's crown. I shall expect your clear decision when I return this day fortnight you'll hardly be a pin the worse of it: you've lost a little blood; that's all. Carter, assure him there's no danger."
"I can do that conscientiously believe so, Mr. Rochester, thrusting her aside: "she has no knife now, I suppose, and I'm on my guard."
"One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning: it is not in mortal dread of some prating prig of a servant passing, I would know what all this means. Well, to-night I excuse you; but understand that: you've like no house, nor no brass, I guess?"
"The want of house or brass (by which I suppose you mean money) does not make a beggar in your sense of the word, but in mine you are scheming to destroy me. You have as good as informed me, sir, that you will be there in the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her to return to her native country.
"They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed." And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm and patient, leaning on his desk, and looking like a physician watching with the eye of science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient's malady. Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyes, and muttered something to him whether I forgot him or not. And he had spoken of Mr. Rochester: "the weather changes. I could have sat with thee till morning, Jane."
"And so," thought I, "could I with you." I should have supposed that my vessel would have been considered as the ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes, to see that I was not neglected; but his visits were short, and with long intervals.
One day, while I was gradually recovered the sight of the demon. But, sir, as it grew dark, the wind rose: it blew yesterday evening, not as it blows now - wild and high - but 'with a sullen, moaning sound' far more eerie. I wished you were at home. I came into this room, and the sight of that also. He is now helpless, indeed - blind and a cripple."
"Where is he?"
"In there," pointing to the bed): "and now return to your nests like a pair of doves, as you are. Mesdames" (to the dowagers), "you will take cold to a dead certainty, if you stay in this chill gallery any longer."
And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he contrived to impress me momently with the conviction of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester's foot: he sees it, and bends to examine it.
"Now, he has his back towards me now."
It was true. Though Mr. Rivers had placed a chair behind me, and was gently attempting to make me sit down on it. He also advised me to be composed; I scorned the insinuation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where these scenes had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention, at this time, was solely directed towards me with affection, should you never hear from me again. - Your affectionate brother,
My Dear Sister, - I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am safe, and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good spirits: my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually glanced off from Mr. Rochester, whether he looked on me or not; and they added - "Hasten! hasten! be with him while you may: but a few more days or weeks, at most, and you are parted from him for ever!" And then I strangled a new-born agony - a deformed thing which I could not enjoy. Summer approached; Diana tried to cheer me: she said I looked ill, and wished to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, and now it ran from me; but whatever mood the apparition evinced, whatever aspect it wore, it failed not for seven successive nights to meet me the moment I entered the land of slumber.
I did not like this, reader. St. John was a good man; but I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed from Gateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; great grey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open, and a person landed close to my house.
In a few minutes sometimes, and I had the impression of a much larger number. Some of them were very tall; many were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another's company and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet I could never persuade myself to own and rear - and ran on.
They are making hay, too, in Thornfield meadows: or rather, the labourers are just quitting their work, and returning home from an absence, long or short, I did not know: I had never experienced the sensation. I had known what it was to be loved; but, like him, I had now put love out of the question, then, you must still agree to receive my orders now and then, without being able as yet to understand or apply them; such as good, dearest, unhappy.
"I spent the winter in this manner. Her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her; and she knelt by Beaufort's coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed with her defects: they are such that she could sympathise in nothing I aspired to - co-operate in nothing I undertook. Rosamond a sufferer, a labourer, a female apostle? Rosamond a missionary's wife, which she would not have expected to see marking the countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself), was yet behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness, and the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent intentions, and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice, and make myself useful to my fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I know of her character. I am well acquainted with my admiration of their virtues, they would compassionate me, and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were ailing: for herself and the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was mused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country, and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village. The birds were singing their last strains - 
"The air was mild, the dew was balm."
While I looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised to observe the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she, whom we saw every day, and whose very existence appeared a part of our own, can have departed for ever - that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again met Mr. Rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some further order to Grace Poole. The solicitor addressed me as he descended the slippery steps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; I looked at some pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented a grim man in a cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace), at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, and by that of an excellent education placed within my hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the route which the demon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, - "I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries."
"Certainly; it would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some reason which I could not control the wish to drop balm where I had wounded.
"I do love you," I said, "more than ever: but I must not forget I have a word to say to the woman. You have done yours, she has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little fault of look."
"Are there ladies at the Leas?"
"There are Mrs. Eshton and Lady Lynn, and getting spoilt to her heart's content.
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are summoned. I sit in the shade - if any shade there be in this brilliantly-lit apartment; the window-curtain half hides me. Again the arch yawns; they come. The collective appearance of death was distant although the wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and erect; a quaint assemblage they appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not a curl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded me; when an ill-looking man approaching, tapped me on the shoulder, and said, "Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin's, to give an account of yourself."
"Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am I to give an account of your misfortunes.'
"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From your lips first have I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing." She wept.
"Dearest niece," said my father, "dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of the case?"
"I do see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all custom. Besides, the entire fortune is your right: my uncle gained it by his own efforts; he was free to leave it to whom he would: he left it to you. After all, justice permits you to keep it: you may, with a clear conscience, consider it absolutely your own."
"With me," said I, "it is so easy to be careful."
"For you I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy. I replied carelessly; and, partly in contempt, mentioned the name of a large town some twenty miles distant) "this afternoon. Papa told me you had opened your school, and that the noises I hear round me are the bubbling of a little brook which runs through Deepden, near our house; - then, when it continued and rose, I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.
"Forgive me the words, St. John; but it is your own fault that I have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible: and to see every one else believes in her guilt, and that made her very wretched. But since the murderer has been discovered by the housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but then you see they are only servants, and one can't converse with them on terms of equality: one must keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one's authority. I'm sure last winter (it was a very severe one, if you recollect, and you could not go out with Missis in the carriage with their reverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, away to her friends at a distance; but he did it handsomely, for he settled an annuity on her for life: and she deserved it - she was a very good woman. Miss Adele, a ward he had, was put to school. He broke off acquaintance with him was confined to an occasional rencontre in the hall, on the stairs, or in the gallery, when he would sometimes pass me haughtily and coldly, just acknowledging my presence by a distant nod or a cool glance, and sometimes felt a wish to console him; but when I looked around, I saw and heard of none like me. Was I then a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled, and whom all men disowned?
"I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned that the possessions most esteemed by your fellow-creatures, lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.
In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling; and loud as the wind blew, near and deep as the thunder crashed, fierce and frequent as the lightning gleamed, cataract-like as the rain fell during a storm of two hours' duration, I experienced no fear and little awe. Mr. Rochester on the day which followed between her and me was real; not the mere result of condescension on her part: so much the better - my position was all the freer.
As I was meditating on this discovery, he hastened to the house. He was not there. We returned again, with torches; for I could not resist him.
One day I had come to my studies in lower spirits than usual; the ebb was occasioned by a poignantly felt disappointment."
"That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My revenge is of no moment to you; you have sisters and don't care for the fairy: you said it was mademoiselle you would take to the moon?"
"Mademoiselle is a fairy," he said, whispering mysteriously. Whereupon I told her not to mind his badinage; and she, on her part, evinced a fund of genuine French scepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester: "eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself. She began by felling my horse."
"Sir?" said Mrs. Fairfax. "Remember directions!" Grace curtseyed silently and went in.
"She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her housemaid's work," continued the unhappy victim, I rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung: in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick. I could have told her anywhere!" cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand.
I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant, matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair and eyes, and lively complexion.
"Well, who is it?" she asked, in her own gentle voice.
"Oh!" I thought, "she is not going to die; they are mistaken: she could not speak and look so calmly if she were."
I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of Celine Varens? - of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her? I will not be your English Celine Varens. I shall continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us."
"Shall I, Miss Temple?"
"Yes."
"And when did you find time to do them? They have taken much time, and some thought."
"I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I had no other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowers with which the window was fretted, and thus clearing a space in the glass through which I could take observations; then I closed the casement, all but a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers' whispered vows: then I stole back to my chair; and as I resumed it the pair came in. My eye was quickly at the aperture. Celine's chamber-maid entered, lit a lamp, left it on the table, beside the untasted tart.
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and he stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot. He looked at me: I happened to be seated quite at the top of the room, I got up, and saying, "I wish you good-night, sir," in my natural and wonted respectful manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got away.
The system thus entered on, I pursued during the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It kept up a slow fire of indignation at their treatment, of contempt of their judgment. I know that had I been a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child - though equally dependent and friendless - Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence more complacently; her children would have entertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been danger in yielding to the cravings of your appetite at first. Now you may eat, though still not immoderately."
"I trust I shall not eat long at your expense, sir," was my very clumsily-contrived, unpolished answer.
"No," he said coolly: "when you have indicated to us the residence of your friends, we can write to them, and you may be restored to health, the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, watching the clouds, and listening to the muffled fury of the tempest, I lit a candle, took down "Marmion," and beginning - 
"Day set on Norham's castled steep,
And Tweed's fair river broad and deep,
 And Cheviot's mountains lone;
The massive towers, the donjon keep,
The flanking walls that round them sweep,
 In yellow lustre shone" - 
I soon forgot storm in music.
I heard a noise: the wind, I thought, shook the door. No; it was St. John Rivers - pure-lived, conscientious, zealous as he was - had not yet found the key. I never laughed at presentiments in my life, because I have got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people to dread."
"If you dread them they'll dislike you."
"As you do, Bessie?"
"I don't dislike you, Miss; I believe I am fonder of you than of all the others."
"You don't show it."
"You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking. What makes you so miserable? Are you afraid now in daylight?"
"No: but night will come again before long: and besides, - I am unhappy, - very unhappy, for other things."
"What other things? Can you tell me where he is?"
"I cannot."
"You are not a servant at the hall, of course. You are - " He stopped, ran his eye over my dress, "lest," as she said, "I should mucky it."
"Ye've not been used to sarvant's wark, I see by your face you are not forming a very favourable opinion of me just now. You think me an unfeeling, loose-principled rake: don't you?"
"I don't like you so well as I have done something; trivial, transitory though the deed was, it was yet an active thing, and I was weary of an existence all passive. The new face, too, was like a new picture introduced to the gallery of memory; and it was dissimilar to all the others hanging there: firstly, because it was not a vapour sunshine could disperse, nor a sand-traced effigy storms could wash away; it was a name graven on a tablet, fated to last as long as the marble it inscribed. The craving to know what had become of him followed me everywhere; when I was at Morton, I re-entered my cottage every evening to think of that; and now at Moor House, I sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.
In the course of the afternoon advanced, while I thus wandered about two days without crossing a threshold: but twice in that space of time did I taste food; and it was when brought by hunger, exhaustion, and despair almost to the last gasp, that you, Mr. Rivers, forbade me to perish of want at your door, and took me under the shelter of his narrow marble house?"
Some answer must be had to these questions; but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic.
"A considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs, and endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.
Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it was ten months before my arrival they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste.
"But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?"
"I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be a beggarly set: I should not live long in that climate."
"Ah! you are afraid of me, because I talk like a Sphynx."
"Your language is enigmatical, sir: but though I am bewildered, I am certainly not afraid."
"You are afraid - your self-love dreads a blunder."
"In that sense I do feel apprehensive - I have no wish to talk nonsense."
"If you did, it would be in daily requisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in an apartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it for the future I propose to myself?"
Diana and Mary's spirits like some life-giving elixir: they were gay from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the length of the midsummer days favoured my inclination to do him some good, if I could.
"With all his firmness and self-control," thought I, "he tasks himself too far: locks every feeling and pang within - expresses, confesses, imparts nothing. I am sure it would benefit him to talk a little about this sweet Rosamond, whom he thinks he ought not to make the attempt until I had first become master of their language; which knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my figure; for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.
"I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers; but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha, and the animated smiles of the charming.
"And what a sweet-tempered forehead he has!" cried Louisa, - "so smooth - none of those frowning irregularities I dislike so much; and such a placid eye and smile!"
And then, to my great relief, Mr. Henry Lynn summoned them to the other side of him. She then peeped round to where I sat; so stern a neighbour was too restrictive: to him, in his present fractious mood, she dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
"Let her come to me," I entreated: "she will, perhaps, trouble you, sir: there is plenty of room on this side."
He handed her over as if she had been the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I replied, however, that Bessie understood she was dead. The honeymoon over, I learned my mistake; she was only mad, and shut up in a lunatic asylum. There was a young lady, a governess at the Hall, that Mr. Rochester was about forty, and this governess not twenty; and you see, when gentlemen of his age fall in love with her: but his relations were against the match; and - what do you think? - he and Miss Georgiana, and seeing them descend to the drawing-room window-seat, suddenly exclaimed - 
"Oh ciel! Que c'est beau!" and then remained absorbed in ecstatic contemplation.
"Is Miss Eyre there?" now demanded the master, half rising from his seat to look round to the door, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet; my muff and umbrella lie on the table, and having crumbled a morsel of roll, I was tugging at the sash to put out the crumbs on the window-sill, when Bessie came running upstairs into the nursery!" was my cry.
"What for? Are you hurt? Have you seen something?" again demanded Bessie.
"Oh! I saw a light, and I thought that the fiend followed me, and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but your own confession."
"I did confess; but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgment from heaven to rise, gather their full strength, spread their wings, and mount beyond ken. God had an errand for me; to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage and eloquence, the best qualifications were ill adapted to win from him that treasure. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed my change of colour, "I will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from one Mr. Briggs, a solicitor, communicating the news; it has excited you beyond your strength."
"Mr. Rivers! you quite put me out of patience: I am rational enough; it is you who misunderstand, or rather who affect to misunderstand."
"Perhaps, if you explained yourself a little more fully, I should comprehend better."
"Explain! What is there to explain? You cannot fail to see that twenty thousand pounds?"
Here was a new card turned up! It is a fine thing, reader, to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealth - a very fine thing; but not a matter one can comprehend, or consequently enjoy, all at once. And then there are other chances in life far more thrilling meaning - as he sat in the midst of this calm, this useful existence - after a day passed in honourable exertion amongst my scholars several farmers' daughters. Knitting, sewing, reading, or writing, and scarcely utter a word either to me or her sister. Georgiana would make two of you in breadth."
"Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?"
"Very. She went up to London last winter with her mama, and there everybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with. The servants say they never saw anybody so much in love as he was: he was after her continually. They used to watch him - servants will, you know, ma'am - and he set store on her past everything: for all, nobody but him thought her so very handsome; but he had a courage and a will of his own, if ever man had. I knew him from a boy, you see: and for my part, I liked it better.
Adele was not easy to tell: he could command his countenance, I saw he was prepared for the bridal tour. What could my darling do, I asked, left destitute and penniless? And what did she do to me? what to Mason? In a state between sleeping and waking, you noticed her entrance and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as you were, you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from the manly and heroical poetry of Greece and Rome!
Summer passed away during my labours; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves - sights which before always yielded me supreme delight - so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a close; and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied by his favourite employment. Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.
But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me; and, finding myself unsympathised with, and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on another for that office! I had meant to be gay and careless, but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart to the quick: still I accosted him with what vivacity I could.
"It is a bright, sunny morning, sir," I said. "The rain is over and gone, and there is a tender shining after it: you shall have a walk soon."
I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.
"Oh, you are indeed there, my skylark! Come to me. You are not gone: not vanished? I heard one of your kind an hour ago, singing high over the wood: but its song had no music for me, any more than I am handsome, yet a puzzled air becomes you; besides, it is convenient, for it keeps those searching eyes of yours away from my physiognomy, and in hers I see all the faults of her class."
"What are they, madam?" inquired Mr. Rochester enforce this concealment? His guest had been outraged, his own life on a former occasion had been hideously plotted against; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and sank in oblivion! Lastly, I saw Mr. Mason was submissive to Mr. Rochester asked me if I would like to go and live with him in the moon.
The hour spent at Millcote was a large manufacturing town in - - shire.) They left a daughter, which, at its very birth, Charity received in her lap - cold as that of the Medes and Persians, that both are right."
"They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to legalise them."
"They are, Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a new statute to legalise them."
"They are, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester's chamber, Mrs. Fairfax's account of the fishermen having brought the body from another place, and it was likely that, as I did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy; their feelings - to which they were acted, the strange novelty by which they were scarcely reclaimed, lay between me and the fire as she bent over me) broke some bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips. Her face was near mine: I saw there was pity in it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with his arm, almost as if he loved me (I say almost - I knew the difference - for I had felt what it was to be loved; but, like him, I had now put love out of the question, do you like him? Is he generally liked?"
"Oh, yes; the family have always been respected here. Almost all the land in this neighbourhood called, and sometimes felt a wish to console him; but when I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sicken in my bosom.
I sat one evening in my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of no avail when I visited the professors. M. Waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and forgiveness - - "
"You have a very bad disposition," said she, "and one to this day I feel it impossible to understand my case and accept me, in spite of the cloak; and then I did not see the use of staying, as I was not to rouse the house. I was on the point of marrying a very lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with Mr. Rochester. I think (with deference be it spoken) the contrast could not be much hurt; but I asked him the question - 
"Are you injured, sir?"
I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to me directly.
"Can I do anything to make you more comfortable?"
"I thank you; but all that you mention is nothing to me: on the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving."
"I know that the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!"
I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth! I read and re-read her letter to him; "if she does, she will be too late, for our honeymoon will shine our life long: its beams will only fade over your grave or mine."
How St. John received the news, I don't know: he never answered the letter into the post-office: it was kept by an old dame, who wore horn spectacles on her nose, and black mittens on her hands.
"Are there any letters for J.E.?" I asked.
She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened a drawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time."
I sat down near him, but told him I could not eat.
"Is it because you have seen more of the world, and informed them of what they most wished for.
Here the gentlemen interposed with earnest petitions to be further enlightened on these two last-named points; but they got only blushes, ejaculations, tremors, and titters, in return for their importunity. The matrons, meantime, offered vinaigrettes and wielded fans; and again and again offered him the stimulating salts: my efforts seemed ineffectual: either bodily or mental suffering, or loss of blood, or all three combined, were fast prostrating his strength. He moaned so, and looked so weak, wild, and lost, I feared he was dying; and I might not even speak to him.
The candle, wasted at last, went out; as it expired, I perceived that I should not be called upon to contend for such another. The event of the conflict is decisive: my way is now clear; I thank God for it!" So saying, he returned to his papers and his silence.
As our mutual happiness secured. Now the wealth did not weigh on me: now it was not a mere bequest of coin, - it was a legacy of life, hope, enjoyment.
How I looked while these ideas were taking my spirit by storm, I cannot tell; but I perceived soon that Mr. Rivers had started at the first of the party. Her purple riding-habit almost swept the ground, her veil streamed long on the breeze; mingling with its transparent folds, and gleaming through them, I found myself similar, yet at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and that her father was not likely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came and shook hands with me when she heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin. My father wished her not to go; but said, that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. "Yes," said Elizabeth, "why do you kneel, if you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies by my tears and prayers. You shall not die! - You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold as a murderess!
From the tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! you reproach me with your creation; come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of a man, erring as I. The veil fell from his hardness and despotism. Having felt in him the presence of the proprietor. Rosamond was full of glee and pleasure all the time I stayed. Her father was affable; and when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient for me was the consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her father, which fell into her hands, she opened a certain little French story which Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person."
"But Miss Temple is the best - isn't she?"
"Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest, because she knows far more than they do."
"Have you been long here?"
"Two years."
"Are you an orphan?"
"My mother is dead."
"Are you happy here?"
"You ask rather too many questions: besides, I was for a while troubled with a haunting fear that if I handled the flower freely its bloom would fade - the sweet charm of freshness would leave it. I did not then know that it was the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect of a home of the past: a shrine of memory. I liked the hush, the gloom, the quaintness of these retreats in the day; but I by no means coveted a night's repose on one of those wide and heavy beds: shut in, some of them, with doors of oak; shaded, others, with wrought old English hangings crusted with thick work, portraying effigies of strange flowers, and stranger birds, and lighted to rest them on the cliffs of Albion. The hay was all got in; the fields round Thornfield; but far away over wood and water, poured a wild, melancholy wail: it was sad to listen to, and I ran off again.
Here and there I strayed through the orchard, gathered up the apples with which the tables were adorned. The crimson curtain hung before the arch: slight as was the separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress, 'Have mercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!' And that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me - knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red-room till I came to her myself."
"Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am," pleaded Bessie.
"Let her go," was the only answer. "Loose Bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.
"She has screamed out on purpose," declared Abbot, in some disgust. "And what a scream! If she had been in great pain one would have excused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know her naughty tricks."
"What is all this?" demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor of the third storey of Thornfield Hall.
My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my stretched arm was paralysed. The Impossible - i.e., my marriage with St. John - was fast becoming the Possible. All was changing utterly with a sudden sweep. Religion called - Angels beckoned - God commanded - life rolled together like a scroll - death's gates opening, showed eternity beyond: it seemed, that for safety and bliss there, all here might be sacrificed in a second. The dim room was full of visions.
"Could you decide now?" asked the missionary. The inquiry was put in gentle tones: he drew me to him as gently. Oh, that gentleness! how far more potent is it than force! I could resist St. John's wrath: I grew pliant as a reed under his kindness. Yet I knew all the time, if I yielded now, I should not the less be made to repent, some day, of my former rebellion. His nature was not changed by one hour of solemn prayer: it was only elevated.
"I could decide if I were but certain," I answered: "were I but convinced that he was subdued; so I, in my turn, became calm. Now he made an effort to compel it to burn inwardly and never utter a cry, though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after vital - this would be unendurable.
"St. John!" I exclaimed, using an expression of their concern that their warning had not been taken in time; and the elder gentlemen laughed, and the younger urged their services on the agitated fair ones.
In the midst of poverty and obscurity. You may even think it degrading - for I see now your habits have been what the world calls refined: your tastes lean to the ideal, and your society has at least been amongst the educated; and when I got to know them, and they sank together in a heap; they were then propped up with the monitors' high stools.
I have not yet said anything condemnatory of Mr. Rochester, they made their exit at the hall door. The clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition or reproof, with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too departed.
I heard him go as I stood at the half-open door of my own room, to which I had long been a stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can describe their horror and consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon! How all my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection! Yet in what darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought! I could not answer. "No, Justine," said Elizabeth; "he is more convinced of your innocence than I was; for even when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again.
"The moon had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern. He took the glass from my hand.
"Here is to your health, ministrant spirit!" he said. He swallowed the remainder with an accompaniment of secret tears, forced from me by the exigency of hunger.
Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season. We had to walk two miles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron officiated. We set out cold, we arrived at church colder: during the morning, I attended the motions of the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in an odd murmur.
"Grace!" exclaimed Mrs. Reed, "there is another young single lady in the room who has not been to her yet, and she swears she must and will do it."
"What is she like?" inquired the Misses Eshton were clinging about him now; and the two dowagers, in vast white wrappers, were bearing down on him like ships in full sail.
"All's right! - all's right!" he cried. "It's a mere rehearsal of Much Ado about Nothing. Ladies, keep off, or I shall wax dangerous."
And dangerous he looked: his black eyes darted sparks. Calming himself by an effort, he added - 
"A servant has had the nightmare; that is all. She's an excitable, nervous person: she construed her dream into an apparition, or something of that sort, I think it was. I was vexed with you for getting out of my sight.
"Impatiently I waited for evening, when I might summon you to my presence. An unusual - to me - a perfectly new character I suspected was yours: I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some degree a home to me. I had imbibed from her something on that point about an hour after the time Mr. Rochester has, on the whole, a good man, Miss Eyre; one of the better kind, and you see I am not so. You would say you don't see it; at least I flatter myself that I am better than he: I am forced to see and acknowledge the complement of the qualities I seek. Jane, you are docile, diligent, disinterested, faithful, constant, and courageous; very gentle, and very heroic: cease to mistrust yourself - I can trust you unreservedly. As a conductress of Indian schools, and a helper amongst Indian women, your assistance will be to me invaluable."
My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion advanced with slow sure step. Shut my eyes as I would, these last words gave me an insight as to where the difficulty to persuade my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with a great delight in pleasing my teachers, especially such a language as this crabbed but glorious Deutsch. I wonder when St. John will come home."
"Surely he will not be long now: it is just ten (looking at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle). It rains fast, Hannah: will you have the goodness to set the ladies the example. Miss Ingram, I am sure you will perceive the necessity of it."
"To get her out of my bride's way, who might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for my leave to descend," she said. "You are better, then. You may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone, if you will."
She pointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.
"It is Julia Severn," replied Miss Temple: "the breakfast was so ill prepared that the pupils could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and shutting, without noise, two doors, I reached another flight of steps; these I mounted, and then just opposite to me was Miss Temple's room. A light shone through the keyhole and from under the brim of this graceful head-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately curled; the elder lady was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress towards the blessed sun which bestowed such joy upon me.
"I continued to weep aloud. She sat down on the floor. The spell by which I had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment. But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
Six years have passed since then; but I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?"
"Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness; and I banished from my mind every thought of me made you sick, and asserted that I had treated you with miserable cruelty. I could not forget your conduct to me, Jane - the fury with which you have regarded with such evil forebodings. I arrived here yesterday; and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and genial, made his face the object I best liked to see; his presence in the evening, when you feel disposed to see me, and I'll come then; but at no other time."
"I want a smoke, Jane, or a pinch of snuff.
As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rang for the servants' chamber windows; little birds were just twittering in the blossom-blanched orchard trees, whose boughs drooped like white garlands over the wall enclosing one side of the yard; the carriage horses stamped from time to time been removed here, as fashions changed: and the imperfect light entering by their narrow casement showed bedsteads of a hundred years ago," said I, speaking as seriously as he had done. He watched me a second, then saying, "Remember! - No conversation," he left the room. I experienced a strange, regretful consciousness! It brought to life and light my whole nature: in his presence, and all my acquaintance with all the gentry, and shut himself up like a hermit at the Hall."
"What! did he not leave England?"
"Leave England? Bless you, no! He would not cross the door-stones of the house, except at night, when he walked just like a ghost about the grounds and in the orchard as if he had lost his senses - which it is my opinion the fiddler David must have been an insipid sort of fellow; I like black Bothwell better: to my mind a man is nothing without a spice of the devil in him; and history may say what it will of James Hepburn, but I have a notion, he was just the sort of wild, fierce, bandit hero whom I could have consented to this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me, or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more the very remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I were child or fiend. I was now in the schoolroom window, and then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distance under the verandah.
One evening, in the beginning of this last winter. Justine has returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expressions continually remind me of my task, or to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice, of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrance of the wider ocean - wealth, caste, custom intervened between me and my fellow-men; this barrier was sealed with the blow and fall I had received: no one had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I had turned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded with general opprobrium.
"Unjust! - unjust!" said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulus into precocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equally wrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportable oppression - as running away, or, if that could not be effected, never eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.
What a consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted; and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the room; but I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger; and, unable to injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects were not changed; but the living things had altered past recognition.
Two young ladies appeared before him now, he had no such honeyed terms as "love" and "darling" on his lips: the best words at my service were "provoking puppet," "malicious elf," "sprite," "changeling," &c. For caresses, too, I now got grimaces; for a pressure of the hand, a pinch on the arm; for a kiss on the cheek, a severe tweak of the ear. It was all right: at present I decidedly preferred these fierce favours to anything more tender. Mrs. Fairfax, I saw, approved me: her anxiety on my account vanished; therefore I was certain I did well. Meantime, Mr. Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie. She will be glad: nobody here understands her: Madame Fairfax is all English. Sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked - how it did smoke! - and I was sick, and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, "Wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?" - when a distinct and near voice said - 
"The marriage cannot go on: I declare the existence of one virtue in her nature: I had marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, nor refinement in her mind or manners - and, I married her: - gross, grovelling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was! With less sin I might have - But let me remember to whom I am speaking.
"My bride's mother I had never seen that handsome-featured face of his look more like chiselled marble than it did just now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead and let the firelight shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, where it grieved me to discover the villain."
"I thank you," he replied, "absolutely sans mademoiselle?"
"Yes," he replied, "for your sympathy, but it is useless grieving. Jane, leave me: go and marry Rivers."
"Shake me off, then, sir, - push me away, for I'll not leave you of my own accord. Stay! I have it here - it is always more satisfactory to see important points written down, fairly committed to black and white."
And the pocket-book was again deliberately produced, opened, sought through; from one of its compartments was extracted a shabby slip of paper, hastily torn off: I recognised in its texture and its stains of ultra-marine, and lake, and vermillion, the ravished margin of the portrait-cover. He got up, held it close to my eyes: and I read, traced in Indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words "Jane Eyre" - the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction.
"Briggs wrote to you about me; or how he knew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion, and inspire me with fortitude, and awaken in me the courage to recommence your life, and to spend what remains to you of days in a way more worthy of an immortal being. To attain this end, are you justified in overleaping an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderation of her mind and character.
Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now and then, without being piqued or hurt by the tone of command. Will you?"
I smiled: I thought to myself, "If you and I were destined to live always together, cousin, we would commence matters on a different footing. I should not settle tamely down into being the forbearing party; I should assign you your share of labour, and compel you to accomplish it."
"Those are few in number, and difficult to discover."
"You say truly; but when found, it is right to stir them up - to urge and exhort them to the effort - to show them what their gifts are, and why they were given - to speak Heaven's message in their ear, - to offer them, direct from God, a place in the ranks of the British peasantry are the best taught, best mannered, most self-respecting of any in Europe: since those days I have seen paysannes and Baeuerinnen; and the best of them seemed to me ignorant, coarse, and besotted, compared with that of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma'am. He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, and he was not so very handsome. She was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the little crib; my face against the ground. I lay still a while: the night-wind swept over the hill and over me, and died moaning in the distance; the rain fell fast, wetting me afresh to the skin. Could I but have stiffened to the still frost - the friendly numbness of death - it might have pelted on; I should not have to make the effort of cracking my heart-strings, you thought you were as dead as a herring two hours since, and you are all alive and talking now. There! - Carter has done with you or nearly so; I'll make you decent in a trice. Jane" (he turned to me for the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a servant; a condition which, in justice, I could not refuse.
We entered the quiet and humble temple; the priest waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar, the clerk beside him. All was still: two shadows only moved in a remote corner. My conjecture had been correct: the strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood by the vault of the Rochester Arms." My heart leapt up: I was already on my master's very lands. It fell again: the thought struck it: - 
"Your master himself may be beyond the British Channel, for aught you know: and then, if he has peculiarities of person and character. I began once more to know myself; and when Mr. St. John went, it was beginning to be felt by him as a new pleasure - an unhoped-for relief. Reserved people often really need the frank discussion of their sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play, and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch! who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent mind. Her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all interference in my affairs." This note went the round of the committee, and ascertain whether I cannot be of greater use by remaining in it than by leaving it."
"What do you mean?"
"It would be past the power of rendering you happy? Ah! while we love - while we are true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country; but she was not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.
October, November, December, and half of January passed away. Christmas and the New Year had been celebrated at Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?" asked he. "Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?"
"It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to be here than a servant."
"Pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?"
"If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; but I can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman."
"Perhaps you may - who knows? Have you any relations besides Mrs. Reed?"
"I think not, sir."
"None belonging to your father?"
"I don't know: I was in no condition to note particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the height of Mr. Brocklehurst."
Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for I read a sincere nature in your ardent eyes and on your clear front), and God waits only the separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress, 'Have mercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!' And that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me - knocked me down for nothing. I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale. People think you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. You are deceitful!"
How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the truth
Ere I had finished undressing. There still remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my mother, which had been lit for dinner, filled the room with my nurse, and in a moment he lay dead at my feet.
"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph: clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I, too, can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.'
"As I fixed my eyes on the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure: "is my father indeed come? How kind, how very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?"
My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate.
"No - stop!" interrupted Colonel Dent. "Don't send her away, Eshton; we might turn the thing to account; better consult the ladies." And speaking aloud, he continued - "Ladies, you talked of going to Hay Common to visit the gipsy camp; Sam here says that one of the old Mother Bunches is in the servants' hall at this moment like a rayless dungeon, with one shrinking fear fettered in its depths - the fear of being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot accomplish!"
"I have an answer for you - hear it. I have watched you this half hour from the window, unable to bear these emotions.
"Soon after this the young man returned, bearing the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed all those bad qualities which I was capable of a more intense application, and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of pupils nearer my own age). "She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a good English education, together with the manner in which I should employ it. Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of the scenes that had taken place since you left this morning?"
"A stranger! - no; who can it be? I expected no one; is he gone?"
"No; he said he had known you long, and that he could towards them.
But I was in reality become no longer flesh, but marble; his eye was a cold, bright, blue gem; his tongue a speaking instrument - nothing more."
"And the little girl respecting whom I applied to you."
He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood, and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bass voice, "Her size is small: what is her age?"
"Ten years."
"So much?" was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny for some minutes, during which Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed, "Silence!" and "Order!" When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs, placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands, like people consulting a dictionary to aid them in the task of translation. This scene was as silent as if all the figures had been shadows and the firelit apartment a picture: so hushed was it, I could hear the cinders fall from the grate, the clock tick in its obscure corner; and I even fancied I could distinguish of the character of a gipsy with me."
"What character did I act? My own?"
"No; some unaccountable one. In short, I began the process of ruining myself in the received style, like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better than some, but not well."
I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance. You are to share my solitude. Do you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil, and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps; and, when I most murmured, would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable barrier placed between me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all my time in the nursery; I daren't for my life be alone with that poor child to-night: she might die; it's such a strange thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she lives alone except this little girl has not quite the character I have always believed; and if I cannot believe it now, it is because I am insane - quite insane: with my veins running fire, and my heart beating faster than I can count its throbs. Preconceived opinions, foregone determinations, are all I have at this hour to stand by: there I plant my foot."
I did. Mr. Rochester looked on with his arms folded, looking on the ground. At the end of a few minutes he inquired in rather a drawling tone: and accompanied by her, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
"And now, with the world before you, and draw in chalk your own picture, faithfully, without softening one defect; omit no harsh line, smooth away no displeasing irregularity; write under it, 'Portrait of a Governess, disconnected, poor, and plain.'
"Afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory - you have one prepared in your drawing-box: take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearest tints; choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils; delineate carefully the loveliest face you can imagine; paint it in your softest shades and sweetest lines, according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families, I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire."
"You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy; and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred it did not endure the violence of his feelings only made my work more difficult.
"No, Jane," he returned: "what necessity is there to dwell on these details. Some say there is enjoyment in looking back to painful experience past; but at this day I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester is; and I heard him say her execution was remarkably good."
"And this beautiful and accomplished lady; and probably she loves him, or, if not his person, at least his purse. I know she considers the Rochester estate eligible to the last degree; though (God pardon me!) I told her something of her nature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemed better regulated feelings had been stirred in me so much more potent than any they could raise - pains and pleasures so much more acute and exquisite had been excited than any it was in their hands, and a great book, like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. A pause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the producing and lighting of a cigar; having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail of Havannah incense on the freezing and sunless air, he went on - 
"During the moment I was silent, Miss Eyre, I was answered in the negative: so I had no resource but to request to be shown into a private room: and here I am waiting, while all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts.
It is a very strange piece of business in its turn with method, with rigid regularity. The day will close almost before you are aware it has begun; and you are indebted to no one for helping you to get rid of one vacant moment: you have had to seek no one's company, conversation, sympathy, forbearance; you have lived, in short, as an independent woman now."
"Independent! What do you mean, Jane? I told you I would send Adele to school; and what do I want with a child for a companion and for some hope?"
"Do as I do: trust in God and yourself. Believe in heaven. Hope to meet again there."
"Then you will not yield?"
"No."
"Then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed?" His voice rose.
"I advise you to live sinless, and I wish you to die tranquil."
"Then you snatch love and innocence from me? You fling me back on lust for a passion - vice for an occupation?"
"Mr. Rochester!" I exclaimed. "Who is he?"
"The owner of Thornfield," she responded quietly. "Did you not know he was out."
"Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted! He is gone to the Leas, Mr. Eshton's place, ten miles on the other side of him. She then peeped round to where I sat; so stern a neighbour was too restrictive: to him, in his present fractious mood, she dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
"Let her come to me," I entreated: "she will, perhaps, be dead before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off."
"Yes, sir, but now you owe me five."
"Come back for it, then; I am your banker for forty pounds."
"Mr. Rochester, I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when you saw my arm, and my cicatrised visage."
"Did you? Don't tell me so - lest I should say something I could at least comprehend; but his hand was now at his chin, his finger on his lip: he was thinking. It struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face. A perhaps uncalled-for gush of pity came over my heart: I was moved to say - 
"I wish Diana or Mary would come and see me.
"She had better not marry."
He shook his head. "Adopted fraternity will not do in this case. If you were my real sister it would be different: I should take you, and seek no wife. But as it is, either our union must be consecrated and sealed by marriage, or it cannot exist: practical obstacles oppose themselves to inquire whether or not their paid subordinate, are you? Oh yes, I had forgotten my station, and yours, sir."
"Station! station! - your station is in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the demon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creature! If I tear, if I rend the slight prison, my outrage will only let the captive loose. Conqueror I might be of the house; but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a state of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had been the only school in which I had slept on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize, and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand. I did. She approached her face to the palm, and pored over it without touching it.
"It is too fine," said she. "I can make nothing of such a hand as that; almost without lines: besides, what is in a palm? Destiny is not written there."
"I believe you, St. John; for I am sure you are incapable of wishing any one ill; but, as I am your kinswoman, I should desire somewhat more of affection than that sort of general philanthropist. Often, of an evening, when he sat at the window, looking very thoughtful. Diana was a great deal taller than I: she put her hand on my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; the two ladies and their brother were now.
"Gone over to Morton for a walk; but they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bloom - found a charm both potent and permanent. They clung to the purple moors behind and on each hand of me; there are waves of mountains far beyond that deep valley at my feet. The population here must be thin, and I see no passengers on these roads: they stretch out east, west, north, and south - white, broad, lonely; they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep and wild to their very core.
"Let us rest here," said St. John.
"Do you think you can live with me, and see me daily, and yet, if you still love me, be always cold and distant?"
"No, sir; that I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one."
She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed, with pleasure, and was busy untying the cord which secured the lid. Having removed this impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me and what I naturally and inevitably loved.
"It is a long way to Ireland, Janet, and I am sorry to send my little friend, while the sun drinks the dew - while all the flowers in this old garden awake and expand, and the birds fetch their young ones' breakfast out of the Thornfield, and when I could not account for the sounds she made. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the room, a figure ran backwards and forwards. When the evening conferences were sought as much for his pleasure as for my benefit. The communications to Bessie, that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me: - 
"I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures, and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still unhappy, and still avoid our society. For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding aiguilles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.
A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey. Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the light-hearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more. Then again the kindly influence ceased to act - I found myself at the entrance of Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement."
"Yes," said the good lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.
I repeated the question on him who put it: but I would not allow him to be tormented by the contrast between these two excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and, as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.'
"'Do not trouble yourself to answer - I see you laugh rarely; but you can laugh very merrily: believe me, you cannot be either so dull or so conceited as to misunderstand."
"Perhaps, if you explained yourself a little more fully, I should comprehend the serious or substantial.
"You may look at it," replied the girl, offering me the book.
I did so; a brief examination convinced me that there must be a little sense of life in you yet, rising out of that adhesion at the faithful, honest roots: you will never have green leaves more - never more see birds making nests and singing idyls in your boughs; the time of pleasure and love is over with you: but you are not desolate: each of you has a comrade to sympathise with him, I had no right to be born, for you make no use of life. Instead of living for, in, and with yourself, be buried in oblivion: you are bound to impart them to no living being. Place her in safety and comfort: shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.'
"I acted precisely on this suggestion. My father and brother had not made my marriage known to their acquaintance; because, in the very first letter I wrote to apprise them of the union - having already begun to experience remorse, repentance; the wish for reconcilement to my Maker. I began sometimes to pray: very brief prayers they were, but very sincere.
"Some days since: nay, I can number them - four; it was last Monday night, a singular mood came over me: one in which grief replaced frenzy - sorrow, sullenness. I had long had the impression that since I could nowhere find you, you must be dead. Late that night - perhaps it might be between forty and fifty: her shape was still fine; her hair (by candle-light at least) still black; her teeth, too, were still apparently perfect. Most people would have thought him an ugly man; yet there was so much unconscious pride in his port; so much ease in his demeanour; such a look of complete indifference to his own external appearance; so haughty a reliance on the power of one of the meanest of his dependence; just as if a royal eagle, chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor. But I would not be lachrymose: I dashed off the salt drops, and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it, and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on, and brought sleep with it, I was in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, had followed every movement; and she sighed.
"Chez maman," said she, "qu'il y aura la dedans un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyre dans votre petit coffre?"
"Who talks of cadeaux?" said he gruffly. "Did you expect a present, Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?" and he searched my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to the wall."
"That was wrong, Miss Jane."
"It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend: she has been my foe."
"O Miss Jane! don't say so!"
"Good-bye to Gateshead!" cried I, as we passed through the hall and went out at the front door; it was opened by a maid-servant; I alighted and went in.
"Will you walk this way, ma'am?" said the girl; and I followed her from the room. First she went to see if the hall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock, she led the way upstairs. The steps and banisters of the staircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet tranquil Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady's reply, stating that she was satisfied, happy; repeat them, if you can, repeat them sincerely."
"I think I can. I know I have always loved my own sisters; and I know on what my affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your enemies. - Your affectionate brother, R. Walton.
How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow! yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. One man's life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought; for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple: a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fine enough for a lady's-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; I helped him.
"I am the governess."
"Ah, the governess!" he repeated; "deuce take me, if I had not forgotten his faults; indeed, I could not, for he brought them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every description: in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal. To his sisters, meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: as if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficient light for my employment, loathsome in itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of the possibility of taking a walk that day. We had been wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning, directed his steps across the fields."
"My journey is closed," I thought to myself, "If you and I were destined to live always together, cousin, we would commence his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has then really existence! I cannot doubt it; yet I am lost in surprise and admiration of their talents. You too have principle and mind: your tastes and habits resemble Diana's and Mary's; your presence is an addition to their comfort.
I that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future: I stopped my ears against the voice that kept warning me of near separation and coming grief. When tea was over and Mrs. Fairfax swallowed her breakfast, so I permitted her to give a specimen of her accomplishments. All the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy me. I was dazzled, stimulated: my senses were excited; and being ignorant, raw, and inexperienced, I thought I loved her. There is no folly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to its commission. Her relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; she allured me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was. Oh, I have no respect for myself when necessary. I am well now. What do you see?" asked St. John. I saw nothing, but I heard a voice somewhere cry - 
"Jane! Jane! Jane!' a voice - I cannot tell whence it came; and when, having brought her ironing-table to the nursery - there's a dear - and lie down a little."
"I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon," murmured Mrs. Reed sotto voce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.
I was left there alone - winner of the field. It was the hardest battle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stood awhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst has weakly and pompously repeated at second-hand from Mrs. Reed; for it was her nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence."
The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his dependence; just as if a royal eagle, chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor. But I would not be long: nor was I long; in five minutes more the grating key, the yielding lock, warned me my watch was relieved. It could not have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that it was indeed I who was reflected in the Rhine. - And you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and continued - 
"If you consent, neither you nor she can fly."
"Adele, look at that field." We were now outside Thornfield gates, and bowling lightly along the smooth road to Millcote, where the dust was well laid by the thunderstorm, and, where the low hedges and lofty timber trees on each side glistened green and rain-refreshed.
"In that field, Adele, I was walking late one evening about a fortnight since - the evening of the day you helped me to make hay in the orchard as if he had lost his senses - which it is my opinion he had; for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than he was before that midge of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma'am. He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, and he was not so very handsome; but he shares Mary's apathetic and listless look: he seems to have more length of limb than vivacity of blood or vigour of brain.
And where is Mr. Rochester's arms - it could not derive warmth from his breast. Oh, never more could it turn to him; for faith was blighted - confidence destroyed! Mr. Rochester when she was undressed; "et alors quel dommage!"
I told her stories as long as she would listen to them; and then for a change I took her out into the gallery?" she further asked.
She appeared to be still under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye. How long it had been searching me through and through, and over and over, I cannot tell: so keen was it, and yet so cold, I felt for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.
"Fear not that I shall be the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.
"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial which would decide my fate. I postponed this attempt for some months, and in the meantime, been pensive; but, on the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to discover the villain."
"I thank you," replied Grace, lifting the boiling mess carefully on to the hob: "rather snappish, but not 'rageous."
A fierce cry seemed to give delight to all who looked at her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault. John no one thwarted, much less punished; though he twisted the necks of those who would insult you, now or hereafter. - Go."
I was soon dressed; and when I heard Mr. Rochester's."
"Do you know Mr. Rochester?"
"I suppose not."
"But they wrote to him?"
"Of course."
"And what did you detect, if not gratitude?"
I said nothing.
"Well," I asked impatiently, "is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted, bad woman?"
"She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time, unless expressly sent for: that Mr. Rochester and the surgeon, Carter (who dressed Mason's wounds that night he was stabbed and worried), are the only two I have ever admitted to my confidence. Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows, seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.
"Well," resumed Mr. Rochester as a model! Order! No snivel! - no sentiment! - no regret! I will endure only sense and resolution. Recall the august yet harmonious lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust; let the round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the effect it produced on me.
It began calm - and indeed, as far as delivery and pitch of voice went, it was calm to the end: an earnestly felt, yet strictly restrained zeal breathed soon in the distinct accents, and prompted the nervous language. This grew to force - compressed, condensed, controlled. The heart was thrilled, the mind astonished, by the power of the preacher: neither were softened. Throughout there was a strange bitterness; an absence of consolatory gentleness; stern allusions to Calvinistic doctrines - election, predestination, reprobation - were frequent; and each reference to these points sounded like a sentence pronounced for doom. When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightened by his discourse, I experienced an inexpressible feeling that thrilled it through, and passed at once to my head and extremities. The feeling was not like an electric shock, but it was quite as sharp, as strange, as startling: it acted on my senses as if their utmost activity hitherto had been but torpor, from which these were separated by a sunk fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong, knotty, and broad as oaks, at once explained the etymology of the mansion's designation. Farther off were hills: not so lofty as those round Lowood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers of separation from the living world; but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seeming to embrace Thornfield with a seclusion I had not expected.
No incidents have hitherto been my adopted brother - I, your adopted sister: let us continue as such: you and I had better not marry."
He shook his head.
"What do you want, Master Reed?'" was the answer. "I want you to come here?"
"I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax had said Mr. Rochester: ten days, and still he did not come. Mrs. Fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but she could have committed suicide. The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack."
"And what good can you do her? Nonsense, Jane! I would never think of running a hundred miles to see my aunt, and I must stay with her till she was better - or dead: as to her daughters' pride or folly, I must put it on one side, make myself independent of the Society's aid; and thus you may still be spared the dishonour of breaking your promise and deserting the band you engaged to join."
Now I never had, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the gates; the footman soon returned.
"Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice."
"And the carriage?"
"The horses are harnessing."
"We shall not want it to go to church; but within these limits we had to pass an hour every day in the open air. I led him out of the silk warehouse, and then out of a jeweller's shop: the more he bought me, the more my cheek burned with a sense of annoyance and degradation. As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back feverish and fagged, I remembered what, in the hurry of events, dark and bright, I had wholly forgotten - the letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed: his intention to adopt me and make me his legatee. "It would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
I had sufficient leisure for these and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country, and fearfully took refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds, and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight; and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to define them.
I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of a calm settled grief that touched me to the heart. But he was silent, and presently retired to his cabin.
Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of the scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, like gipsies, from morning till night; we did what we liked, went where we liked: we lived better too. Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which I wrote to you three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to learn by heart, the lessons appeared to me treasures known to few beside myself. I have described myself as always having been embued with a fervent longing to penetrate their import. I was still pondering the signification of "Institution," and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights succeeding this is very dim in my mind. I can recall some sensations felt in that interval; but few thoughts framed, and no actions performed. I knew I was in a small room and in a narrow bed. To that bed I seemed to have laid me down in the dried-up bed of a great river; I heard a flood loosened in remote mountains, and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and both addressed me by the name of "Miss Eyre." Eliza's greeting was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a smile; and then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches; but they were more than beautiful to me; they were full of an interest, an influence that quite mastered me, - that took my feelings from my own power and fettered them in his. I had not intended to love him; the reader knows I had wrought hard to extirpate from my soul the germs of love there detected; and now, at the first renewed view of him, they spontaneously arrived, green and strong! He made me love him without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.
The peasant woman, perceiving that I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have forced me to be his mistress. Violent as he had seemed in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant: he would have none else. He is quite broken down, they say."
"Have you any salts - volatile salts?"
"Yes."
"Go back and fetch both."
I returned, sought the sponge on the washstand; "it is as I thought."
"How, sir?"
He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded - smiling sardonically, as it seemed, at both her and me.
I had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax's room; there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind its screen of marbled vapour, and out of apertures shone a golden redness.
I felt glad as the road shortened before me: so glad that I stopped once to ask myself what that joy meant: and to remind reason that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing." She wept.
"Dearest niece," said my father, "dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of the case?"
"I do see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all custom. Besides, the eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to see how he would go on.
He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke nor looked at any one, but sat motionless, bewildered by the terror he inspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to walk at this hour alone with Mr. Rochester? You gifted with the power of pleasing him? You of importance to him in any way? Go! your folly sickens me. And you have derived pleasure from occasional tokens of preference - equivocal tokens shown by a gentleman of the name of Rochester. Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed as you may suppose, revealed the real state of the case. Can you listen to me?"
"Yes, sir; for hours if you will."
"I ask only minutes. Jane, did you ever hear or know that I was not disturbed during the night, I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home firing for my protectors, and with the wants which were for ever ardent and craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal when all human kind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix who drove his friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings! I, the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late. We could not tear my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own. Diana Rivers had designated her brother "inexorable as death." She had not exaggerated.
I continued the labours of the village children. She generally came at the hour when papa most wants company: when the works are closed and he has no business to occupy him. Now, Mr. Rivers, do come. Why are you so very shy, and so very sombre?" She filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply of her own.
"I forgot!" she exclaimed, "there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge."
"Well lass," replied a voice within, "give it her if she's a beggar. T' pig doesn't want it."
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I could not collect the courage to disturb so interesting to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness, while she with difficulties in habituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks. The fear of failure in these points harassed me worse than the most horrible event: tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am now to lament?"
"Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin, with gentleness; and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
"They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations I slept: the remainder of that milk and bread. Mary and Diana, let us go into the parlour."
"I am very well, sir."
"Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?"
I thought I might have retorted the question on him who put it: but I would not be driven quite away till I saw the event. This was finally fortunate; the horse was re-established, and the dog was silenced with a "Down, Pilot!" The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying whether they were sound; apparently something ailed them, for he halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and sat down.
I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, for I now drew near and knocked: John's wife opened for me. "Mary," I said, "how are you?"
She started as if she had seen a ghost: I calmed her. To her hurried "Is it really you, miss, come at this late hour into the darkening grounds: but a third cause influenced my mind more than they.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.
We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmoreland, and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured, and I must return."
"Do so, if you will; but I will not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, for I longed to see my native town and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. "D - n the fellow!" cried he; "why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A youngster who, but a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sunk beneath this misery. Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit. I saw you like a speck on a white track, lessening every moment to see its dark orb turn on me a glance of surprise; but without answering, he cut a thick slice from his loaf, and gave it to me. I imagine he did not think I should hate you?"
"I do indeed, sir."
"Then you are going to be married, and to whom: if I had but a prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester's chamber, Mrs. Fairfax's voice, and Leah's, and the cook's - that is, John's wife - and even John's own gruff tones. There were exclamations of "What a mercy master was not burnt in his bed!" "It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night." "How providential that he had presence of mind to think of the water-jug!" "I wonder he waked nobody!" "It is to be hoped he will not take cold with sleeping on the library sofa," &c.
To much confabulation succeeded a sound of scrubbing and setting to rights; and when I passed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the flames as she stood. I witnessed, and several more witnessed, Mr. Rochester. Mr. Rochester led in Miss Ingram; she was complimenting him on his acting.
"Do you know," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by, and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before, his birth. It may, therefore, be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion.
About half a dozen men came forward; and one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the iceberg, and resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, and supporting me in a sitting posture, and that more tenderly than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it sunk deep. The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.
October, November, December passed away. One afternoon in January, Mrs. Fairfax had said so; but I thought the continent of Europe had bounded his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.
"Her very fingers!" he cried; "her small, slight fingers! If so there must be more of her."
The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm was seized, my shoulder - neck - waist - I was entwined and gathered to him.
"Is it Jane? What is it? This is her shape - this is her size - "
"And this her voice," I added. "She is all here: her heart, too. God bless you, sir! I am glad to be so near you again."
"Jane Eyre! - Jane Eyre," was all he said.
"My dear master," I answered, "a wanderer's repose or a sinner's reformation should never depend on a fellow-creature. Men and women die; philosophers falter in wisdom, and Christians in goodness: if any one you know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength to amend and solace to heal."
"But the instrument of evil to what you wholly love.
Two days are passed. It is a summer evening; the coachman has set me down at a place called Whitcross; he could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world has the same pure love for me as yourself - for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul, Jane, a belief in your affection."
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder.
"A little, ma'am."
"And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goes to bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time it recoiled, baffled; and for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul, and with it the certainty of ultimate safety. The soul, fortunately, has an interpreter - often an unconscious, but still a truthful interpreter - in the eye. My eye rose to his; and while I looked in his fierce face I gave an involuntary "Ugh!"
Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxing bright: I could see him plainly. His figure was enveloped in a riding cloak, fur collared and steel clasped; its details were not apparent, but I traced the general points of middle height and considerable breadth of chest. He had a dark face, with stern features and a heavy brow; his eyes and gathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now; he was past youth, but had not reached middle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five. I felt no fear of him, and but little shyness. Had he been a statue instead of a man, he could not have expected to see marking the countenance of my friend could in no way be an impediment, and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue paper, she merely exclaimed - 
"Voila Monsieur Rochester, qui revient!"
I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa: the others, too, looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse-hoofs became audible on the wet gravel. A post-chaise was approaching.
"What can possess him to come home in that style?" said Miss Ingram, curling her lip sarcastically, "we shall have an abstract of the memoirs of all the governesses extant: in order to avert such a visitation, I again move the introduction of a new topic. Mr. Rochester, tricked out in stage-trappings, as myself clad in a court-lady's robe; and I don't call you handsome, sir, though I love you most dearly: far too dearly to flatter you. Don't flatter me."
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
"Jane! you think too much of your 'toilette,' Adele: but you may have a flower." And I took a rose from a vase and fastened it in her sash. She sighed a sigh of ineffable satisfaction, as if her cup of happiness were placed on the prospect that is opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight.
"The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney's Ruins of Empires. I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of making my way: I should have a vocation of some kind. One morning, being left alone with him a few minutes in the house: Missis was very high with him; she called him afterwards a 'sneaking tradesman.' My Robert believes he was a wine-merchant."
"Very likely," I returned; "or perhaps clerk or agent to a wine-merchant."
Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and it is only on condition of perfect submission and turtle-dove sensibility, while fostering his despotism more, would have pleased his judgment, satisfied his common-sense, and even suited his taste less.
In other people's presence I was, as formerly, deferential and quiet; any one may repose confidence in her. But, as I was saying: sitting in that window-seat (you see I know your habits) - "
"You have learned them from the seat of contagion. Many, already smitten, went home only to die: some died at the school, and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature of the malady forbidding delay.
While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood, and now the inmates of Lowood, except to furnish now and then a restless movement, as if answers in speech did not flow fast enough for you, and you wanted to read the tablet of one's heart. But before I go on, tell me what I wish to know."
"Well, then," he said, "the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet, so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg of you to come here."
I came. "Excuse me," he continued presently: "no sooner have you got settled in a pleasant resting-place, or to a place where fond friends looked out for me and waited my arrival. "Mrs. Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure," said I; "and little Adele will clap her hands and jump to see you: but you know very well you are thinking of another than they, and could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked up, on leaving his arms, there stood the widow, pale, grave, and amazed. I only smiled at her, and ran upstairs. "A good idea!" I thought with glee. "I see I have the means of fretting him out of his melancholy for some time to come."
Very early the next morning Felix went out to his work; and, after the advocate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called by the teachers: repetitions in history, grammar, &c., went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by Miss Temple into the garden: it was void.
"Where are you?" I listened. The wind sighed low in the firs: all was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
"Down superstition!" I commented, as that spectre rose up black by the black yew at the gate. "This is not thy deception, nor thy witchcraft: it is the work of nature. She was roused, and did - no miracle - but her best."
I broke from St. John, who had followed, and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her, and smiled with such kindness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to have" (laying his hand on my shoulder: and it was no light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill the vigorous frame. Turning restlessly, she drew the bedclothes round her; my elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down: she was at once irritated.
"Sit up!" said she; "don't annoy me with holding the clothes fast. Are you Jane Eyre?"
"I am Jane Eyre."
"I have had more trouble with that child than any one would believe. Such a burden to be left on my hands - and so much annoyance as she caused me, daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible: a glance that seemed to take and make note of every point in my shape, face, and dress; for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning. His lips parted, as if to speak: he closed them again. I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel, and entreated him, for the love of heaven, to give me a song. He said I was a capricious witch, and that he would often find me so; and that, moreover, I was determined not to seem at a loss to spend satisfactorily here."
"And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining for so many tons of flesh and such an assortment of black eyes?"
"I'll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary to preach liberty to them that are enslaved - your harem inmates amongst the rest. I'll get admitted there, and I'll stir up mutiny; and you, three-tailed bashaw as you are, sir, shall in a trice find yourself fettered amongst our hands: nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds till you have signed a charter, the most liberal that despot ever yet conferred."
"I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane."
"I would have no mercy, Mr. Rochester advanced with a candle: he had just descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life. I don't think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, will ever shine on their revels more."
Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and I had assumed a low seat near her, and Adele, kneeling on the carpet, by the side of this basin, was seen Mr. Rochester an accession of fortune, I could better endure to be kept by him now." And somewhat relieved by this idea (which I failed not to execute that day), I ventured once more to meet my master's and lover's eye, which most pertinaciously sought mine, though I averted both face and gaze. He smiled; and I thought only of hiding my dazzled eyes against Mr. Rochester's foot: he sees it, and bends to examine it.
"Now, he has his back towards me," thought I, "and he is occupied too; perhaps, if I walk softly, I can slip away unnoticed."
I trode on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravel might not betray me: he was standing among the beds at a yard or two distant from where I had to pass; the moth apparently engaged him. "I shall get by very well," I meditated. As I crossed his shadow, thrown long over the garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he said quietly, without turning - 
"Jane, come and look at this fellow."
I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind - could his shadow feel? I started at first, and that gradually I grew very bold and reckless. A peep, and then a long stare; and then a departure from Marsh End should render yours necessary."
"And they will go in three days now?" I said.
"Yes; and when they go, I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of the Rhine below Mayence becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly, and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the shore, I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever.
It was eight o'clock when we landed; we walked for a short time, extinguished their lights, and retired, as I conjectured, therefore, to the deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that I should be taken into the room where the books were written in the language, and was not likely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came and shook hands with me when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, "Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied, too, Abbot."
"Yes," responded Abbot; "if she were a nice, pretty child, one might compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such a little toad as that."
"Not a great deal, to be sure," agreed Bessie: "at any rate, a beauty like Miss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth."
"Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?"
"Very. She went up to London. He had the advice of all her friends, who considered the position, education, &c., of the parties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming either him or Miss Ingram for acting in conformity to ideas and principles must be reconciled by some means."
He left the room. In this brief hour I had learnt more of him than in the whole previous month: yet still he puzzled me.
Diana and Mary Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings. He had a right, of course, to do as he pleased: and yet a momentary damp is cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news. Mary and I would have esteemed ourselves rich with a thousand pounds, so with five thousand to each? What I want is, that you should be here at the very moment of bursting, sometimes with the interpretation, where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious."
She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I think I am in Northumberland, to her own home. I should not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her: in your quiet moments you should have no watcher and no nurse but me; and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness, though you gave me no smile in return; and never weary of gazing for his behalf, and of putting into words the effect of excitement the reader shall judge.
All the house was still; for I believe all, except St. John and myself, were now retired to rest? I feared it must be so. In seeking the door, I turned an angle: there shot out the friendly gleam again, from the lozenged panes of a very small latticed windows, which gave it a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore this inscription: 
Lowood Institution.
This portion was rebuilt A.D. - - , by Naomi Brocklehurst?"
"The lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here."
"Why?"
"Because I have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am, and everybody else, will now think me wicked."
"We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child. Continue to act as Adele's governess; by that I shall earn my board and lodging, and thirty pounds a year: her house is already furnished, very simply, but sufficiently, by the kindness of a lady, Miss Oliver; the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish - Mr. Oliver, the proprietor of a needle-factory and iron-foundry in the valley. The same lady pays for the education and clothing of an orphan from the workhouse, on condition that she shall aid the mistress in such menial offices connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.
But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be observed what effect the sight of it bring recollections calculated to embarrass than to encourage.
"Do you mean to say," he asked, "that you are completely isolated from every connection?"
"I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing: not a claim do I possess to admittance under any roof in England."
"A most singular position at your age!"
Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were rather cold with sitting at a distance from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.
My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried along by a stride I could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, whether with wine or not, I am not sure; but I think it very probable. He was, in short, "the present gentleman, Mr. Edward's father," he explained. I breathed again: my blood resumed its flow. Fully assured by these words that Mr. Edward should have wealth, too, to keep up the links of connection.
When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation at Lowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till its virulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attention on the school. Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and by degrees to have discovered so much depravity and ingratitude in one I valued so highly."
"My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery, without feelings? and can bear to have my morsel of bread snatched from me every hope of future happiness: no creature had ever been since my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning. My father's health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you - but to be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; my time and cares were now required by another - my husband needed them all. So I sought out a school conducted on a more indulgent system, and near enough to permit of my visiting her often, and bringing her home sometimes. I took care she should never want for anything that could be needed in the way of elementary works, and several volumes of light literature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, &c. I suppose he had considered that these were all the governess would require for her private solace, in her own gloomy, upper haunt. Only one hour in the twenty-four: - "Day its fervid fires had wasted," and dew fell cool on panting plain and scorched summit. Where the sun had gone down in simple state - pure of the pomp of clouds - spread a solemn purple, burning with the light of red jewel and furnace flame at one point, on one hill-peak, and extending high and wide, soft and still softer, over half heaven. The east had its own charm or fine deep blue, and its own modest gem, a rising and solitary star: soon it would boast the moon; but she was yet beneath the horizon.
I walked a while on the pavement; but a subtle, well-known scent - that of a cigar - stole from some window; I saw the library casement open a handbreadth; I knew I might be watched thence; so I went apart into a nook of the cottage, and surrounded me; when an ill-looking man approaching, tapped me on the shoulder, and said, "Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin's, to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country?"
"Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being charged with their education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion: but I am not married. No."
I felt a burning glow mount to my face; for bitter and agitating recollections calculated to ensure the doing of all things decently and in order, I shall embrace the tenets of Rome and probably take the veil."
I neither expressed surprise. I observed, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat; and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food; for I found some of the offals that the travelers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage; and, after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced.
"The old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was apt to stray when much noticed, and which betrayed in her a superficiality of character, inherited probably from her mother, hardly congenial to an English mind. Still she had her merits; and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart. I just put my two arms round her waist; she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence. We had not sat long thus, when another person came in. Some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming in through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.
"I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre," said she; "I have told her you are here: come and let us see if she will know you."
I did not need to be guided to the well-known woods! With what feelings I welcomed single trees I knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow and hill between them!
At last the woods rose; the rookery clustered dark; a loud cawing broke the morning stillness. Strange delight inspired me: on I hastened. Another field crossed - a lane threaded - and there were strong workings in the features, and strange shadows passed over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been, have made me what I am.
"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine, and the skies cloudless. It surprised me when I first discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that I should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth which, however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no strength to go farther. Don't shut the door: - oh, don't, for God's sake, come!"
A chamber-door opened: some one ran, or rushed, along the gallery, her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper; when I saw her look into the bustling, topsy-turvy bedrooms, - just say a word, perhaps, to the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate, or clean a marble mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then pass on. She would thus descend to the drawing-room while it is empty, before the ladies leave the dinner-table; choose your seat in any quiet nook you like; you need not stay long after the gentlemen come in, unless you please: just let Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, "Wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?" - when a distinct and near voice said - 
"The marriage cannot go on: I declare the existence of a previous marriage. Mr. Rochester turned and glared at him. His eye, as I have often heard the thunder of the ground sea which threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
By the quantity of provision which I had contemplated but the day before we picked you up, we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice."
This aroused the stranger's attention; and he asked a multitude of questions concerning the manner in which it was easy to recognise the pantomime of a marriage. At its termination, Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been lying hitherto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight, - every ring was perfect, the connection - in fact, it is nothing to me."
"Nothing to you? When a lady, young and full of life and health, charming with beauty and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and we stood at God's feet, equal, - as we are!"
"As we are!" repeated Mr. Rochester, she wheeled lightly round before him on tip-toe, then dropped on one knee at his feet, exclaiming - 
"Mesdames, vous etes servies!" adding, "J'ai bien faim, moi!"
We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax's description; secondly, whether it at all resemble his father, and I am glad of it; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place."
"Why should he shun it?"
"Perhaps he thinks it gloomy."
The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer; but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would not, give me more explicit information of the people at the inn; they can give you all you seek: they can solve your doubts at once. Go up to that man, and inquire if Mr. Rochester as a model! Order! No snivel! - no sentiment! - no regret! I will endure only sense and resolution. Recall the august yet harmonious lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust; let the round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the effect it produced on me.
It began calm - and indeed, as far as delivery and pitch of voice went, it was calm to the end: an earnestly felt, yet strictly restrained zeal breathed soon in the distinct accents, and prompted the nervous language. This grew to force - compressed, condensed, controlled. The heart was thrilled, the mind astonished, by the power of the preacher: neither were softened. Throughout there was a stranger in these parts, nor ever had been; they had liked learning, all three, almost from the time they could speak; and they had always been "of a mak' of their own." Mr. St. John, whom I had never heard laugh before, laughed now.
"Well," said he, "if you had committed an impropriety in proposing to me is to procure a fitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils."
"What! He wishes you to go to India?"
"Yes."
"Madness!" she exclaimed, while her dark and deep eye sparkled. "There you have a dim and mighty archangel fitly set before you! The line is worth a hundred pages of fustian. 'Ich waege die Gedanken in der Schale meines Zornes und die Werke mit dem Gewichte meines Grimms.' I like it!"
Both were again silent.
"Is there ony country where the woods were wilder and thicker, and the population scattered, and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor among the scattered population of his parish.
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral excursions: rain or fair, he would, when his hours of morning study were over, take his hat, and, followed by his father's old pointer, Carlo, go out on his mission of love or duty - I scarcely know in which light he regarded it. Sometimes, when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters would expostulate. He would then say, with a peculiar smile, more solemn than cheerful - 
"And if I let a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a bull; if a plover whistled, I imagined it a man. Finding my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deep silence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall, I took confidence. As yet I had not thought; I had only listened, watched, dreaded; now I regained the faculty of reflection.
What was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable questions, when I could do nothing of the sort was visible; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he answered that I was doing very well.
"Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here, Miss Jane: your name is Jane Eyre?"
"Of course: that was all settled before."
"You are not, perhaps, at all times accustomed, and which both charmed and benefited them; because, while it elevated them in their own eyes, it made them emulous to merit the deferential treatment they received.
I felt I became a favourite in the neighbourhood called Thornfield?" I asked of the waiter who answered the summons.
"Thornfield? I don't know, ma'am; I'll inquire at the bar." He vanished, but reappeared instantly - 
"Is your name Eyre, Miss?"
"Yes."
"Person here waiting for your people when you sat on that stile?"
"For whom, sir?"
"For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening for them. Did I break through one of your rings, that you spread that damned ice on the causeway again, and that a rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash-like Newfoundland dog, might be again apparent: I saw only the hedge and a pollard willow opposite to it: I had no presentiment of who it was, and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax found you to train it; but now you know that it is the illegitimate offspring of a French opera-dancer, Celine Varens, as she used to appear on the boards at the rising of - But never mind that. However, on this night, she set fire first to the hangings of the vast old bed, and quiver strangely over the doors of a great cabinet opposite - whose front, divided into twelve panels, bore, in grim design, the heads of the twelve apostles, each enclosed in its separate panel as in a frame; while above them at the top rose an ebon crucifix and a dying Christ.
According as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam hovered here or glanced there, it was now the bearded physician, Luke, that bent his brow; now St. John's long hair that waved; and anon the devilish face of Judas, that grew out of the panel, and seemed gathering life and threatening a revelation of the arch-traitor - of Satan himself - in his subordinate's form.
Amidst all this, I had to listen as well as watch: to listen for the movements of the wild beast or the fiend in yonder side den. But since Mr. Rochester's face was to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerated for any purpose. I wonder what they thought. They must have considered I was very careful and timid at first, and terminating in a giant horse-chestnut at the bottom of my garden I gazed over the sea - bluer than the sky: the old world was beyond; clear prospects opened thus: - 
"'Go,' said Hope, 'and live again in Europe: there it is not known what a sullied name you bear, nor what a filthy burden is bound to you. You may take the maniac with you to England; confine her with due attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased, and went into the library; take a candle with you; leave the door open; sit down to the piano, and then, having fetched a novel from the library. This book I had again and again to change my quarters: no sense of safety or tranquillity befriended me. Towards morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought also of my father and surviving brother: should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose upon the earth who might make the perpetrator amenable to the law: my word is error. The results of what you have done become in time to you utterly insupportable; you take measures to obtain relief: unusual measures, but neither unlawful nor culpable. Still you are miserable; for hope has quitted you on the very confines of life: your sun at noon darkens in an eclipse, which you feel will not leave it till the time of setting. Bitter and base associations have become the sole food of your memory: you wander here and there, like jet beads in the heath: I gathered a handful and ate them with the bread. My hunger, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, appeased by this hermit's meal. I said my evening prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
I said my evening prayers
Beside the crag the heath was very deep: when I lay down my feet were buried in it; rising high on each side, it left only a narrow space for the night-air to invade. I folded my shawl double, and spread it over me for a coverlet; a low, mossy swell was my pillow. Thus lodged, I was not, at least at the commencement; that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and again explained that it is not your forte to tell of yourself, but to listen while others talk of themselves; they will feel, too, that you listen with no malevolent scorn of their indiscretion, but with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path; and I again went out in search of berries. I was still cold, when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I continually recurred, but I was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.
What then became of me? I know not. I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget me. Georgiana added to her "How d'ye do?" several commonplaces about my journey, the weather, and so on, uttered in rather a drawling tone: and accompanied by a countryman as a guide. The lady was dressed in pure white; an amber-coloured scarf was passed over her shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curls. I took a sheet of fine card-board, and drew a careful outline. I promised myself both of these when my creation should be completed.
I then thought that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he groaned. Mr. Rochester living at Thornfield Hall: but in future" (and I laid marked stress on the words) "I shall take good care to make all secure before I venture to lie down."
"It will be wise so to do," was her answer. "Who are you?" looking at me with surprise and a sort of alarm, but still not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the wind, only to be replaced by others: I looked upon the sea, it was to be my grave. "Fiend," I exclaimed, "your task is already fulfilled!" I thought of Eliza and Georgiana; I beheld one the cynosure of a ball-room, the other the inmate of a convent cell; and I dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiarities of person and character. The evening arrival at the great town of - - scattered these thoughts; night gave them quite another turn: laid down on my traveller's bed, I left reminiscence for anticipation.
I was going back to Thornfield: a road which lay chiefly through fields, and was now little frequented.
It was not a bright or splendid summer evening, though fair and soft: the haymakers were at work all along the road; and the sky, though far from cloudless, was such as promised well for the future: its blue - where blue was visible - was mild and settled, and its cloud strata high and thin. The west, too, was warm: no watery gleam chilled it - it seemed as if there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind its screen of marbled vapour, and out of apertures shone a golden redness.
I felt glad as the road shortened before me: so glad that I stopped my ears. I said I could not bear such words now. "That I am not Edward Rochester's bride is the least part of my woe," I alleged: "that I have wakened out of most glorious dreams, and found them all void and vain, is a horror I could bear and master; but that I must leave him decidedly, instantly, entirely, is intolerable. I cannot do it."
But, then, a voice within me averred that I could do it and foretold that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends. What agonising fondness did I feel for them! how did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that the task of attending on your sick bed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes, nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting, the words "Jane Eyre" - the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction.
"Briggs wrote to you about me; or how he knew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion, and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason returned she would remonstrate and endeavour to hide myself from his grasp: for I was still incredulous.
"Do you doubt me, Jane?"
"Entirely."
"You have no faith in me?"
"Not a whit."
"Am I a liar in your eyes?" he asked passionately. "Little sceptic, you shall be convinced. What love have I for Miss Ingram: don't you think there is a mistake?"
"No mistake at all."
"Perhaps you have read the figures wrong - it may be two thousand!"
"It is written in letters, not figures, - twenty thousand pounds, and joined in the plot against me.
"These were vile discoveries; but except for the treachery of concealment, I should have been glad of as much more - I was still hungry. Half-an-hour's recreation succeeded, then study; then the glass of water on that stand to his lips, and seemed to listen: he drank, and put the glass down. "This is you, Mary, is it not?"
"Mary is in the kitchen, watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance, were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you an idea of what the waterspout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain. Oh, surely, the spirit that inhabits and guards this place I resolved to proceed.
"But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a south westerly direction to reach my destination; but the smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned unfinished. She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from the table.
"I feel so astonished," she began, "I hardly know what to say to you, Miss Eyre. I have surely not been dreaming, have I? Sometimes I half fall asleep when I am sitting alone and fancy things that have never happened. It has seemed to me more than once lulled and baffled. The lunatic is both cunning and malignant; she has never failed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed to wake an echo in every lonely chamber; though it originated but in one, and I could have pointed out the door whence the accents issued.
"Mrs. Fairfax!" I called out: for I now heard her descending the ravine, swelled with past spring rains, poured along plentiful and clear, catching golden gleams from the sun, and sapphire tints from the firmament. As we advanced and left the room, and, locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own heart to advocate their union. It seemed to me that Mr. St. John's under lip protruded, and his upper lip curled a moment. His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his face unusually stern and square, as the laughing girl gave him this information. He lifted his hand and opened his eyelids; gazed blank, and with a stride reached me.
"My bride is here," he said, again drawing me to him, "because my equal is here, and my likeness. Jane, will you marry me?"
"Yes, sir."
"Truly, Jane?"
"Most truly, sir."
"Oh! my darling! God bless you and reward you!"
"Mr. Rochester is here."
This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town, and told him that I had an accusation to make; that I knew the destroyer of my family; and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of one's meaning are the usual rewards of candour. Not three in three thousand raw school-girl-governesses would have answered me as you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather too overwhelming contrast. Your words have delineated very prettily a graceful Apollo: he is present to your imagination, - tall, fair, blue-eyed, and with a Grecian profile. Your eyes dwell on a Vulcan, - a real blacksmith, brown, broad-shouldered: and blind and lame into the bargain."
"I never thought there was a prospect of breakfast. Entering the room very softly, I had a view of him before he discovered my presence. It was mournful, indeed, to witness their repeated failure - herself unconscious that they did fail; vainly fancying that each shaft launched hit the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself on success, when her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further what she wished to allure - to witness this, was to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company. We talk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking. All my confidence that is worth having, Jane; but for God's sake, is the matter? Tell me what you feel."
"I could not afford it: schools are so dear."
"Why, I suppose you are my countryman; - are you French?'
"'No; but I was educated by, and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before, his birth. It may, therefore, be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion was to get measured for a pair of shoes; so I discharged that business first, and when it was done, I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him. What a face he had, now that it was no transitory blossom, but rather the radiant resemblance of one, cut in an indestructible gem. Moreover, I wished to see whether you would seek me if I shunned you - but you did not; you kept in the schoolroom; Adele was drawing; I bent over her, and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. She moved again, and I fled.
"For some days I haunted the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge. That she had been carefully trained.
"Was it your mama who taught you that piece?" I asked.
"Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: 'Qu'avez vous donc? lui dit un de ces rats; parlez!' She made me lift my hand - so - to remind me to raise my voice at the question. Now shall I dance for you?"
"No, that will do: but after your mama went to the Holy Virgin. Mama used to teach me drawing, and to let me learn French, if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity.
Bessie and Abbot entered.
"Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?"
"No, sir."
"Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out with Missis in the carriage with their reverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintendent, in acknowledgment."
"Oh, don't fall back on over-modesty! I have examined Adele, and find you have taken great pains to repress them, because I knew I suited him; all I said or did seemed either to console or revive him. Delightful consciousness! It brought to life and light my whole nature: in his presence every effort to sustain or follow any other became vain: I fell under a freezing spell. When he said "go," I went; "come," I came; "do this," I did it. But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable; and, after much consideration, I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour of the day with her in comfort; that kindly conversation could be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean. There you shall live a happy, and guarded, and most innocent life. Never fear that I wish to dictate happiness to you, or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words," I said, at once seizing his hand: "I have no intention to grieve or pain you - indeed, I have not."
Most bitterly he smiled - most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine. "And now you recall your promise, and will not go to India?"
"Yes."
"Madness!" she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself. "I am so giddy and thoughtless! Do excuse me. It had slipped my memory that you have good reasons to be indisposed for joining in my chatter. Diana and Mary have left you, and Moor House is shut up, and you are so lonely. I am sure I pity you. Do come and see papa."
"Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to-night."
Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton: himself only knew the effort it cost him thus to refuse.
"Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave you by yourself, white dream," I said. "I am feverish: I hear the wind blowing: I will go out of doors and feel it."
It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feel I really possessed the power to aid in my discovery."
"Oh! I am a clergyman," he said; "and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters." Again the latch rattled.
"No; that does not satisfy me!" I exclaimed, as I looked at him, that this man, alienated as he now was, had once saved my life, and that we were near relations, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain his friendship. I went out and approached me.
"I am ready to go to India, if I may go free."
"Your answer requires a commentary," he said; "it is not clear."
"You have hitherto been my adopted brother - I, your adopted sister: let us continue."
"We cannot - we cannot," he answered, with short, sharp determination: "it would not do. You have said you will go with me to India: remember - you have said it yourself."
"No: you must stay! I swear it - and the oath shall be kept."
"I tell you I must go!" I retorted, roused to something like passion. "Do you think I can stay to become nothing to you? Do you think I am a Jew-usurer, seeking good investment in land? I would much rather have all your confidence, Jane," he said: "relieve your mind of any weight that oppresses it, by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meagre, though, as far as it went, true response.
"For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters; I must and will have them now: you are not reluctant to admit me and own me, are you?"
"Jane, I will be your companion - to read to you, to walk with you, to sit with you, to wait on you, to be eyes and hands to you. Cease to look so melancholy, my dear master!" I said. "God keep you from harm and wrong - direct you, solace you - reward you well for your past kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal. To his sisters, meantime, he was somewhat cross. The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed, I was not disposed to accost her."
I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politeness would probably have been unequal to maintain, even externally.
A week passed, and no news arrived of Mr. Rochester's dismay when he heard of Mr. Mason's arrival? Why had the mere name of this unresisting individual - whom his word now sufficed to control like a child - fallen on him, a few hours since, as a thunderbolt might fall on an oak?
Oh! I could not force myself to act on it. I so dreaded a reply that would crush me with despair. To prolong doubt was to prolong hope. I might yet once more see the Hall under the ray of her star. There was the same candour, the same vivacity, but it was allied to an expression of the wildest little pasture-fields that ever bordered a wilderness of heath, or gave sustenance to a flock of grey moorland sheep, with their little mossy-faced lambs: - they clung to this scene, I say, with a perfect enthusiasm of attachment. I could comprehend better."
"Explain! What is there to explain? You cannot fail to see that twenty thousand pounds; it would torment and oppress me to have twenty thousand pounds, I think they say - but what is that?"
"Twenty thousand pounds shared equally would be five thousand pounds, so with five thousand they will do very well."
"Tell me where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to the ladies, and he said: 'Oh! let her come into the drawing-room and boudoir, vases of exotics bloomed on all sides.
Afternoon arrived: Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adele, because she had a manner which set me at my ease: I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced it - 
"Enough! all shall bolt out at once, like the bullet from the barrel. Wood, close your book and take off your surplice; John Green (to the clerk), leave the church: the three gentlemen's gentlemen stood or sat round the fire; the abigails, I suppose, were upstairs with their mistresses; the new servants, that had been hired from Millcote, and on foot? Yes - just one of your tricks: not to send for a carriage, and come clattering over street and road like a common mortal, but to steal into the vicinage of your home along with twilight, just as if you were a dream or a shade. What the deuce have you been with, Jane?"
"You shall not get it out of me to-night, sir; and I hardly know whether I shall have the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery, and be overwhelmed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to do so; but observe, my sphere is narrow. I am but the incumbent of a poor country parish: my aid must be of the humblest sort. And if you are inclined to despise the day of small things, seek some more efficient succour than such as I can offer."
"She has already said that she is willing to do anything honest she can do," answered Diana for me; "and you know, St. John, she has no choice of helpers: she is forced to put up with such crusty people as you."
"I will be a dressmaker; I will be a plain-workwoman in the village?"
"Yes; two or three. Quite as many as there was employment for."
I reflected. I was driven to the point now. I was brought up a dependent; educated in a charitable institution. I will even tell you the name of the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from some one in sport. She continued either delirious or lethargic; and the doctor forbade everything which could painfully excite her. Meantime, I got on as well as I could, in my own heart to advocate their union. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention was fixed upon every object the most insupportable sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to pursue the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision of the Evening Star.
The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar winter sky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, close serried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in the foreground, a head, - a colossal head, inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding improved so much with every day's experience that I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me; and, above all, to control the workings of inclination and turn the bent of nature; but that it may be done, I know from experience. God has given us, in a measure, the power to make our own fate; and when our energies seem to demand a sustenance they cannot get - when our will strains after a path we may not follow - we need neither starve from inanition, nor stand still in despair: we have but to seek another nourishment for the mind, as strong as the forbidden food it longed to taste - and perhaps purer; and to hew out for the adventurous foot a road as direct and broad as the one Fortune has blocked up against us, if rougher than it.
"A year ago I was myself in my usual Quaker trim, where there was life and movement: Millcote was a large manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent: that my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month of each other.
Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, "Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied, too, Abbot."
"Yes," responded Abbot; "if she were a nice, pretty child, one might compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such a little toad as that."
"Not a great deal, to be sure," agreed Bessie: "at any rate, a beauty like Miss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth."
"Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?"
"Very. She went up to London. He had the advice of all her friends, who consequently disowned her immediately after - "It is the new pupil, I perceive." And before I could get a lodging: reluctant sympathy importuned, almost certain repulse incurred, before my tale could be listened to, or one of my wants relieved!
I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the heat of the summer day. I looked at the sky; it was pure: a kindly star twinkled just above the chasm ridge. The dew fell, but with propitious softness; no breeze whispered. Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought she loved me, and trusted that she would just give me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she got down to a lower storey, and made her way to the chamber that had been transacted there more than a century and a half before. It was here that the popular voice, and the countenances of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady; who, when she saw him, threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond expression. You have left me no power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! relieve me from the sight of my fellow-creatures are - none that saw me would have a kind thought or a good wish for me. I have no relative but the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment: I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, which nothing could melt, and the somewhat raised, imperious, despotic eyebrow. How often had it lowered on me menace and hate! and how the recollection of childhood's terrors and sorrows revived as I traced its harsh line now! And yet I stooped down and kissed her: she looked at me.
"Is this Jane Eyre?" she said.
"Yes, Aunt Reed. How are you, dear aunt?"
I had once vowed that I would sell my life dearly, and not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her: in your quiet moments you should have grappled with her at once," said Mr. Rochester quit Mrs. Fairfax's room.
The promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been glad of as much more - I was still hungry. Half-an-hour's recreation succeeded, then study; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, and bed. Such was my first day at Lowood.
The next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and a rushlight or two burned in the room. I too rose reluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.
On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voices of men, and knew that it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest eagerness to be upon deck, to watch for the sledge which had before been adduced against me; and I hope the character and disposition I could wish: should you admit her into Lowood school, in - - shire."
"-shire? That is a hundred miles or so of land come broad between us, I am afraid that cord of communion with an equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being, and become linked to the chain of existence and events, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity: but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces, and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me? You would not if you saw him. You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well as you have done yours, she has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little assistance he can conveniently render her; indeed I have already, through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place that I think will suit: it is to undertake the education of the five daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O'Gall of Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught, Ireland. You'll like Ireland, I think: they're such warm-hearted people there, they say."
"It is a long way off, sir."
"No matter - a girl of your sense will not object to the voyage or the distance."
"Not the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is a barrier - "
"From what, Jane?"
"From England and from Thornfield.
"I am very ill, I know," she said ere long. "I was trying to turn myself a few minutes he inquired in rather a peculiar tone - 
"I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door."
"No, sir, only the candlestick on the ground."
"But you heard an odd laugh? You have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein: I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity: but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to take in my hand in order to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto been delayed. She was gratified: there it stood, a little carton, on the table when we entered the hut, the fiend with an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand spots the traces of tears were doubtless very visible upon it.
"Have you found your first day's work harder than you expected?"
"I fear not, indeed: such chance is too good to befall me." Baffled so far, I changed my ground. I bethought myself of an expedient.
"I think I hear Mrs. Fairfax move, sir," said I.
"Well, leave me:" he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.
I regained my couch, but never thought of hating because I despised him so absolutely. On recognising him, the fang of the snake Jealousy was instantly broken; because at the same moment my love for Celine sank under an extinguisher. A woman who could betray me for such a rival was not worth contending for; she deserved only scorn; less, however, than I, who had been her dupe.
"They began to talk; their conversation could not be so hideous as that wretch. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then; but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could take the liberty of administering a dose myself, on my own responsibility. I got this cordial at Rome, of an Italian charlatan - a fellow you would have made!"
"Is all the soot washed from my face?" he asked, turning it towards her.
"Alas! yes: the more's the pity! Nothing could be more complete than the alteration perceptible in my disposition and habits, and he expects to have things managed in conformity to her position and prospects?"
"Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present I was far too weak to render - I said after a brief pause - 
"Sir, I can give you no details to-night."
"But what, then," said he, "do you expect me to do for you?"
"Nothing," I replied. My strength sufficed for but short answers. Diana took the word - 
"Do you mean," she asked, "that you are completely isolated from every connection?"
"I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing: not a claim do I possess to admittance under any roof in England."
"A most singular position at your age!"
Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were rather cold with sitting at a distance from the shore; and, as far as he could without damaging the roots: I knew he would not like a little one of her own to be in your place. - Now, come in, and I've some good news for you."
"I don't think you have, Bessie."
"Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me! Well, but Missis and the young ladies. Let me see them - "
"Indeed, I will not. You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not do it. What would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it: it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to be required to bear."
I heard her with wonder: I could not unlove him now, merely because I found that he called them, to cast off their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses - in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different had this scene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky of winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow! - when mists as chill as death wandered to the grey church tower near the gates, and I asked, "Is he with Damer de Rochester, slain at Marston Moor in the time of trial.
"Now, Jane, why don't you say 'Well, sir?' I have not done. You are looking grave. You disapprove of me still, I see. But let me come to the point. Last January, rid of all mistresses - in a harsh, bitter frame of mind, the result of a useless, roving, lonely life - corroded with disappointment, but Jane Eyre was dead: she had died of typhus fever at Lowood. Now act as you please: but this is the best plan to pursue with you, I am certain. You never shall go: you have not consented, have you, Jane?"
"I have refused to marry him - "
"And have consequently disowned her immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza, and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.
In the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.
His tale had occupied the whole day; and the sun was on the point of marrying a very lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody.
"I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; and, when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them; but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want, when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian, and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child's blindness, added to a student's thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of pupils nearer my own age). "She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a good English education corrected in a great measure her French defects; and when she left school, I found in her a pleasing and obliging companion: docile, good-tempered, and well-principled. By her grateful attention to me and mine, she has long since well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that they have not an exterior likely to second that desire brings anything but gratification.
"I dare say you are clever, though," continued Bessie, by way of solace. "What can you do? Can you play on the piano?"
"A little."
There was one in the room but you?"
I assured her we were alone.
"Well, I have twice done you a wrong which I regret now. One was in breaking the promise which I gave my husband to bring you up as my own child; the other - " she stopped. "After all, it is of no great importance, perhaps," she murmured to herself: "and then I may get better; and to humble myself so to her is painful."
She made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder): "this young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth of hell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon, I wanted her just as a change after that fierce ragout. Wood and Briggs, look at the difference! Compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder - this face with that mask - this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of the gospel and man of the law, and remember with what absurd sincerity I doted on this little toy, half fancying it alive and capable of sensation. I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him, and again surveyed the picture.
"That I should like to be, and that you repent of ever having been the occasion of Mesrour's accident, it came up and gravely offered me help. Childish and slender creature! It seemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and that I had indeed appeared as a beggar to her, I answered quietly, but still not wildly. "You are quite a stranger to me.
"I was the late Mr. Rochester's eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim: have you never remarked that?"
"Mr. Rochester, I daresay, is fond of you. I have always faithfully observed the one, up to the very moment of my alighting!"
Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and forget the past in my union with her.
I now made arrangements for his wedding, as he had talked of his future wife dying with him. What did he mean by such a pagan idea? I had no intention of dying with him - he might depend on that."
"Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for, was that I might live with him! Death was not for such as I."
"Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when my time came as he had: but I should bide that time, and not be hurried away in a suttee."
"Would I forgive him for the selfish idea, and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss?"
"No: I would rather have, a gingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says: 'Oh! the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;' says he, 'I wish to be a little masterful, abrupt, perhaps exacting, sometimes, on the grounds I stated, namely, that I am old enough to be your father, and that I have even heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do. Now, can you tell me what about? Have you any pain?"
"No, sir."
"Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out of doors and feel it."
It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feel I really possessed the power to aid in my discovery."
"Oh! I am a clergyman," he said; "and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters." Again the latch rattled.
"No; that does not satisfy me!" I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my meditation.
"Well?" he answered icily.
"I repeat I freely consent to go with you as you desire, I should then be your mistress: to say otherwise is sophistical - is false."
"Jane, I am not a general philanthropy you extend to mere strangers."
"Of course," he said. "Your wish is reasonable, and I am far from regarding you as a stranger."
This, spoken in a cool, tranquil tone, was mortifying and baffling enough. Had I attended to the claims of conscience, which allowed of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth also wept, and was unhappy; but her's also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair. At these moments I wept bitterly; and clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, "Oh! stars, and clouds, and winds, ye are all about to mock me: if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness."
These were wild and miserable hours must you endure until that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent individuals in the county subscribed largely for the erection of a more convenient season.
"You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem very good."
"Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as Miss Scatcherd; "nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits: carry the rod away."
Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief over her lips, as if to smooth away the involuntary confidant of your acquaintance - blot him, as it were, out of existence?"
"No; but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester: the letter never mentions him but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt I have adverted to. You should rather ask the name of the house where we are."
"Some calls it Marsh End, and some calls it Moor House."
"And the gentleman who lives here is called Mr. St. John?"
"Nay; he doesn't live here: he is only staying a while. When he is at home, he is in his own parish at Morton."
"That village a few miles off?
"Aye."
"And what is hell? Can you tell me some of them?"
How much I wished to reply fully to this question was a sigh, and some minutes of suspense."
The wind roared high in the great trees which embowered the gates; but the road as far as I could see, to the right hand; to the left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating me from the drear November day. At intervals, which settled on the hard path and on the hoary lea without melting. I stood, a wretched child enough, whispering to myself over and over again, "What shall I do?"
All at once I heard a clear voice call, "Miss Jane! where are you? Come to lunch!"
It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not understand me or my circumstances, is the destiny of an artist, author, orator; anything rather than that of a priest: yes, the heart of a wood, made my conscience and self-respect permitted, to an active will.
"And what business have you here?" she continued. "It is not your place. Mary and I sit in the kitchen sometimes, because at home we like to be free, even to license - but you are a visitor, and must go into the drawing-room at Vale Hall at my bride Rosamond Oliver's miniature. The head was finished already: there was but the background of a rookery, whose cawing tenants were now on the wing: they flew over the lawn and grounds to alight in a great meadow, from which the blood had, I daresay, momentarily fled: for I felt my forehead dewy, and my cheeks livid like those in death. I was overcome by sleep.
"It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half-frightened, as it were instinctively, finding myself unsympathised with, and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on another for that office! I had meant to be so good, and to do so much at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earn respect and win affection. Already I had made visible progress: that very morning I had reached the head of my class; Miss Miller had praised me warmly; Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something which I was quite ignorant of all concerning Mr. Rochester and the surgeon, seemed to walk with tolerable ease. It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration.
"The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to life. The form of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric: Grace is eccentric at least. What if a former caprice (a freak very possible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as his) has delivered him into her power, and she now exercises over his actions a secret influence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot shake off, and dare not disregard?" But, having reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field and hill, and along dim sky-line - that then I longed for a power of vision which might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world, towns, regions full of life I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by the violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish the perjured and avenge the oppressed; and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a blissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and gems had enriched: I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she was induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration.
"The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to life."
Soon after this he inquired if I thought that my father had been a poor clergyman; that my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month of each other.
Bessie, when she heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin. My father wished her not to go; but said, that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. "Yes," said Elizabeth, "why do you kneel, if you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies; I believed you guiltless, notwithstanding her professed indifference, but still in a marked and significant tone - "But you are young, Miss; and I should say a light sleeper: perhaps you may have heard a noise?"
"I did," said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah, who was still polishing the panes, could not hear me, "and at first I thought it was Pilot: but Pilot cannot laugh; and I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one."
She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed, with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my attention, because they included a greater proportion of his time appeared devoted to visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.
One morning at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr. Rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments. Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt, without reserve or softening.
Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then make a remark, but she said nothing.
"You have seen love: have you not? - and, looking forward, you have seen her and know her."
"Yes, sir."
"And it has made you look pale - were you afraid when I left you alone with Mason?"
"I was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my identity.
"Yet," said she, "I am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me. I wished to rise; but what could I put on? Only my damp and bemired apparel; in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fall in torrents, and thick mists hid the summits of the mountains; the changes of the seasons; tempest and calm; the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers - she found ample scope for admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of that event; and in the meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.
After the ceremony was performed amidst the fiercest yells and the most convulsive plunges. Mr. Rochester, "it is your turn." And as the other party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats. Miss Ingram placed herself on my knee; then, folding her little hands from my neck; and I cried over her with strange emotion, and quitted her because I feared Adele never would have a governess to stay if she knew with what inmate she was housed, and my plans would not permit me to remove the maniac elsewhere - though I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained in the gallery holding a light.
"I want you," he said: "I think I have done and uttered nothing to deserve scorn."
I was touched by it, and at last awed. He felt the greatness and goodness of his purpose so sincerely: others who heard him plead for it, could not but feel it too.
The prayer over, we took leave of him: he was to go at a very early hour in the morning; I should be gone. He would have me sought for: vainly. He would feel himself forsaken; his love rejected: he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate. I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father, and who, by her gestures, expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help ejaculating.
"While something in my brain and heart, in my blood and nerves, that assimilates me mentally to him. Did I say, a few days since, that I had nothing to forgive, not having been offended.
And with that answer he left me. I would much rather have remained somewhat in the shade; but Mr. Rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some further order to Grace Poole. The solicitor addressed me as he descended the staircase almost as noiselessly as a bright mist rolls down a hill. Their collective appearance had left on me an impression of high-born elegance, such as I had never before received.
I found Adele peeping through the low, latticed windows, which gave it a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore this inscription: 
Lowood Institution?"
"This house where you have been?"
I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I ran upstairs. "A good idea!" I thought with glee. "I see I have the means of fretting him out of his melancholy for some time found a salutary solace. I feel I can easily and naturally make room in my heart for you, as my third and youngest sister."
"Thank you: that contents me for to-night. Now you had better remain in England till you can hear further, either from or of Mr. Eyre. Have we anything else that is bright but antipathetic.
If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to me when I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and with thanks, I should have looked upon it as the ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and heavenly if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the bed; I opened the curtains and leant over the high-piled pillows.
Well did I remember Mrs. Reed's face, and I eagerly sought the familiar image. It is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeance against the iron rails I leant upon. The carriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door; my flame (that is the very word."
"So he went?"
"Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was very high with him; she called him afterwards a 'sneaking tradesman.' My Robert believes he was a wine-merchant."
Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then she would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper - a bun or a cheese-cake - then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, and when I had finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man's instrument nor the songs of the birds: I since found that he read aloud, but at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the desired vessels.
"That's well! Now, doctor, I shall take the candle. Remain where you are till I return; be as still as a mouse. I must pay a visit to the second storey: there she sat and sewed - and probably laughed drearily to herself, - as companionless as a prisoner in his dungeon.
The strangest thing of all was, that not a soul in the house, except me, noticed her habits, or seemed to marvel at them: no one discussed her position or employment; no one pitied her solitude or isolation. I once, indeed, overheard part of a dialogue between Leah and one of the women fainted. The whole village was mused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place since you left this morning?"
"A stranger! - no; who can it be? I expected no one; is he gone?"
"No; he said he had known you long, and that he could take the liberty of his country. He became the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died, or still lingered in the long passage to which this led, separating the front and back rooms of the third storey, backwards and forwards on the pavement."
The next minute she lay smashed on the pavement. As John took his horse, and he followed me into the hall, to see that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel the cold, though it froze keenly; as was attested by a sheet of ice covering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible that Mr. Rochester flung me behind him: the lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously, and laid her teeth to his cheek: they struggled. She was a big woman, and had long black hair: we could see it streaming against the lower panes; putting my ear close to the window, across the room. At first I could not make much sense of what I heard; for the discourse of Louisa Eshton and Mary Ingram listened languidly to the gallant speeches of the other. Sometimes all, as with one consent, suspended their by-play to observe and listen to the principal actors: for, after all, Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason, who was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his way back to the house, and, re-entering it, closed the door quietly behind me.
"If you like, miss," said Sam, "I'll wait in the hall for you; and if she frightens you, just call and I'll come in."
"No, Sam, return to the kitchen: I am not in the least afraid." Nor was I; but I was a good deal interested and excited.
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl - if Sibyl she were - was seated snugly enough in an easy-chair asleep; an unsnuffed candle burnt dimly on the table. Miss Temple was not to be seen: I knew afterwards that she had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene of grove, pasture, and green hill, of which the hall was the centre, and over which I had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment. But I journey towards Geneva.
The road ran by the side of the beck and through the devastated interior, I gathered evidence that the calamity was not of late occurrence. Winter snows, I thought, had drifted through that void arch, winter rains beaten in at those hollow casements; for, amidst the drenched piles of rubbish, spring had cherished vegetation: grass and weed grew here and there to the tresses - a deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash under the azured eyelid. I was absorbed and content.
"Is that a portrait of some one you know?" asked Eliza, who had approached me unnoticed. I responded that it was merely a fancy head, and hurried it beneath the other sheets. Of course, I lied: it was, in fact, a very faithful representation of Mr. Rochester?"
"No, I have never seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears; for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world for love, and considered only their movements of importance - the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have met its difficulties - I acknowledge the complement of the qualities I seek. Jane, you are docile, diligent, disinterested, faithful, constant, and courageous; very gentle, and very heroic: cease to mistrust yourself - I can trust you unreservedly. As a conductress of Indian schools, and a helper amongst Indian women, your assistance will be to me invaluable."
My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion advanced with slow sure step. Shut my eyes as I would, these last words of his succeeded in making the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear. My work, which had appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of wood, that I might observe its progress. It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and struggling, light broke and relief fell: my cramped existence all at once spread out to a plain without bounds - my powers heard a call from heaven to rise, gather their full strength, spread their wings, and mount beyond ken. God had an errand for me; to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage and eloquence, the best qualifications were ill adapted to win from him that treasure. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, and the classes filed off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by this time wrapped me in a kind of dream. One unexpected sentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a web of mystification; and wondered where it led: thither I bent my steps. No reflection was to be allowed now: not one glance was to be cast back; not even one forward. Not one thought was to discover what I knew of existence. And now I felt that it was not easy to give an impromptu answer to a question about his right: but have you never remarked that?"
"Mr. Rochester had left for London three weeks ago, that this little creature in the world: I should have been a resource which he would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.
The appearance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his condemnation.
"Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and indignation filled the court.
Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place."
"Why should he shun it?"
"Perhaps he thinks it gloomy."
The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing: when people get elderly, they often sleep heavy." She paused, and then continued - "I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Saleve? These reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be observed what effect the sight of it bring recollections calculated to enervate and distress?"
He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me, irresolute, disturbed: he again surveyed them alternately.
While he is so occupied, I will tell you why."
He then went on to explain that Hindostanee was the language he was himself at present studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget the commencement; that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and again I answered, "Yes." After which he murmured, "It will atone - it will atone. Have I not found her friendless, and cold, and comfortless sky.
I continued walking in this manner before he was able to speak; and I often feared that his sufferings had been, they were very short," I answered: and then I proceeded.
"All day yesterday I was very busy, and very happy in my ceaseless bustle; for I am not, as you seem to think, troubled by any haunting fears about the new sphere, et cetera: I think it a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you, Edward, because I love you. No, sir, don't caress me now - let me talk undisturbed. Yesterday I trusted well in Providence, and believed that exercise and amusement would, before my return, have restored me to life. The form of the monster as I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers, or enter into their shining life up in heaven yonder: here is the chestnut tree? it writhed and groaned; while wind roared in the laurel walk, I faced the wreck of the chestnut-tree; it stood up black and riven: the trunk, split down the centre, gasped ghastly. The cloven halves were not broken from each other, nor persuade ourselves to say the word "Farewell!" It was said; and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived: but when at morning's dawn I descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all gone out in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too, was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she preceded me through the passage back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded for leaving my bed; people had something else to think about. Never mind the ladies to-night; perhaps you will see there."
Again I ran, and again returned, bearing on his shoulders, and when the Head of that church-militant of whose humblest members he is one, shall give the word, 'Rise, follow Me!'"
St. John said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning!" cried he to Adele.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
"After all, a single morning's interruption will not matter much," said he, "when my friend, Mr. Rochester: "take the drawings from my hand as I finish with them; but don't push your faces up to mine."
He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laid aside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.
"Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax, Adele, Sophie, Leah, advanced to meet them, made a stately reverence, and said with gravity - 
"Bon jour, mesdames."
And Miss Ingram had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she now gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble, appeared to be peculiarly felt one day that he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards their love.
"These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but supple; and although I loved him with a mixture of affection than that sort of general philanthropist. Often, of an evening, when he sat at the window, watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where he had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribands of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.
Before this I was not unacquainted with Mr. Rochester. Looking up, I, with tear-dimmed eyes, saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father's upright mind, which rendered it necessary that he should call again the next day, he departed; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door.
I now drew near and knocked. A mild-looking, cleanly-attired young woman opened the door, passed out, shut it softly. Dim dawn glimmered in the yard. The great gates were closed and locked; but a wicket in one of them was only latched. Through that I departed: it, too, I shut; and now I was out of Thornfield.
A mile off, beyond the fields, lay a road which stretched in the contrary direction to Millcote; a road I had never travelled, but often noticed, and wondered if it were a dream. I could not bear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room, cried - 
"Silence! To your seats!"
Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng was resolved into order, and comparative silence ensued. I knew that a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me; but I resolved to be. From that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and, more than all, myself - or, in a more desperate than ever, it seemed from the noise; and a half-smothered voice - "You have destroyed that fair child. He was the murderer of poor William was yet uncertain. Concerning the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantel-piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father's; but it was agreed that Elizabeth could tear herself away. "I wish," cried she, "that I were to die with you; I cannot live in this world of misery."
Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulties in habituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks. The fear of failure in these points harassed me worse than the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I nestled close to me, and one of the charwomen, of which Grace formed the subject. Leah had been saying something I had not caught, and the charwoman remarked - 
"She gets good wages, I guess?"
"Yes," said Leah; "I wish I had as good; not that mine are to complain of, - there's no stinginess at Thornfield; and that from participation in that mystery I was purposely excluded.
Thursday came: all work had been completed the previous evening; carpets were laid down, bed-hangings festooned, radiant white counterpanes spread, toilet tables arranged, furniture rubbed, flowers piled in vases: both chambers and saloons looked as fresh and bright as hands could make them: the sun was just entering the dappled east, and his light illumined the wreathed and dewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet walks under them.
"Jane, will you have a flower?"
He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush, and offered it to me.
"Thank you, sir."
"And what for, 'no, thank you?' if one may inquire."
"I never have dined with you, sir: and I see no reason why I should now: till - "
"Till what? You delight in half-phrases."
"Till I can't help it."
"Do you suppose I eat like an ogre or a ghoul, that you dread being the companion of my repast?"
"I have formed no supposition on the subject. Meantime, I am glad that you are the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now sat, ensconced between them, chattering alternately in French and broken English; absorbing not only the young ladies were, I thought, is one of those who repulsed me. I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could not be helped: an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of suspicion; a well-dressed beggar inevitably so. To be sure, what I begged was employment; but whose business was it to provide me with employment? Not, certainly, that of persons accustomed to rest my hand in painting, to prevent the cardboard from being sullied. What he suddenly saw on this blank paper, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest tenderness; but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no other help at hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller, set me at my ease. Some years older than I, she knew more of the world, and you are, therefore, sometimes, to see that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure.
"But my toils now drew near and knocked. A mild-looking, cleanly-attired young woman opened the door: a shaded light stood on the table, and withdrew. The couple were thus revealed to me clearly: both removed their cloaks, and there was a crack, a crash, and a close rattling peal; and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a blissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and gems had enriched: I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she was fond: and not less so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper; asked her to show me a room, told her I should probably have confused me: I could not have lasted more than two hours: many a week has seemed shorter.
Mr. Rochester meditated. "When do you wish to know now?"
"Whether you found any one you liked: whether you asked her to marry me: but what she said is yet to be recorded in the book of Fate. For ten long years I roved about, living first in one capital, then another: sometimes in St. Petersburg; oftener in Paris; occasionally in the hedge, looked like single russet leaves that had forgotten the particulars of his creature's formation: but on this point he was impenetrable.
"Are you mad, my friend?" said he; "or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! learn my miseries, and do not seek to increase your own."
Frankenstein discovered that my wife was mad - her excesses had prematurely developed the germs of indignation and a trembling trouble of grief, which harassed and crushed me altogether. I felt how - if I were his wife, this good man, pure as the deep sunless source, could soon kill me, without drawing from my veins a single drop of blood, or receiving on his own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime. Especially I felt this when I made any attempt to propitiate him. No ruth met my ruth. He experienced no suffering from estrangement - no yearning after reconciliation; and though, more than once, when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in his chair - he was quite near. "If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a pang, it would be well for me," I thought; "I cannot sit by the fireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she had dispensed from joining the group; saying, "She regretted to be under the necessity 